The Company posted consolidated net loss amounting to ₱416.90 million for the calendar year ended 31 December 2019 compared to ₱593.16 million net loss in the same period last year.
The tables below summarize the consolidated results of operations of ACEPH’s revenues, costs, and expenses for the calendar years ended 31 December 2019 and 31 December 2018.
In July 2019, AC Energy and Axia Power signed a share purchase agreement granting AC Energy the right to purchase Axia Power’s twenty percent (20%) interest in SLTEC. AC Energy assigned the right to ACEPH who accounted for the business combination using the pooling-of-interests method which resulted in the consolidation of SLTEC effective 1 July 2019.

Dividend income
Lower dividend income was recognized from the Company’s various investments in 2019 as compared to the same period last year.
Rental income
Increased as a result of new rental contract entered into by the Parent Company in the first half of the year.

Interest and other finance charges
2019 includes non-cash PFRS 16 lease adjustments and interest on ₱5 billion loan.
Equity in net earnings of associates and JV
The Parent Company picked up its 45% share in the net loss of SLTEC from January to June 2019 compared to a full year equity method of accounting for SLTEC which earned income in 2018.
Other income – net
Went up due to the combined effects of the following:
Claims for business interruption from SLTEC
Increase in interest and other financial income due to higher level of investments
Gain realized from the sale of property and equipment, asset held for sale, fly ash, scrap and investment,
offset by loss on disposal of inventory
Lower YTD foreign exchange gain on foreign-currency denominated deposits due to depreciation of
peso in 2019.
Lower loss on derivatives was posted in 2019 as compared to 2018.
No provision for unrecoverable input tax was recorded in 2019 as compared in 2018.
Others pertains to reimbursement of feasibility cost, reversal of outstanding payables, refund of excess
business taxes paid, and oil hauling and disposal.
Provision for income tax - current
Increase due to higher consolidated taxable income in the calendar year ended 31 December 2019.

Provision for deferred income tax
Recognition of deferred tax asset on NOLCO with expected taxable income benefit in future years, offset by the tax effect of deferred revenue.

The material changes in the consolidated statements of financial position accounts were mainly due to the consolidation of SLTEC. In December 2019, the Parent Company entered into a subscription agreement with Buendia Christiana Holdings Corp. (“BCHC”) to subscribe to the increase in authorized capital stock of BCHC.

Cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and financial assets at fair value through profit and loss
The Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows detail the material changes of these accounts.
Fuel and spare parts
Aside from the effect of the SLTEC consolidation, fuel and spare parts inventory went down due to decrease in fuel purchases.
Input VAT
Higher due to increase in purchases subject to VAT.
Creditable withholding taxes – current portion
Higher balance brought about by lower income tax due.
Other current assets
Decrease primarily due to the collection of deposits as a result of the expiration of certain contracts.
Asset held for sale
Lower due to the sale of the Guimaras Power Plant.
Investments and advances and financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income
Decrease due to the sale of shares of stock held by the Company and as a result of the SLTEC consolidation.
Property, plant and equipment
Significant increase due to consolidation of SLTEC with ₱15.6 billion plant assets and BCHC with land holdings.
Goodwill and intangible assets
Decrease brought about by the provision for probable loss in a geothermal service contract.
Deferred income tax assets
Increase mainly due to the recognition of deferred tax asset (“DTA”) on NOLCO, net of reversal of DTA on deferred income.
Right of use asset
Reported as a result of the application of PFRS 16.
Creditable withholding taxes - noncurrent
Increase due to withholding from customers. Also, the Parent Company had no income tax payments for the calendar year ended 31 December 2019.
Accounts payable and other current liabilities
Higher due to increase in purchases on account and includes the current portion of payable to Axia Power.
Income and withholding taxes payable
Increase mainly due to higher tax withheld from purchases.
Current and noncurrent lease liability
Recognized due to the application of PFRS 16.
Short-term loan
Decrease due to the prepayment and amortization of loans.
Long-term loans – current and noncurrent
Increase due to ₱10.7 billion balance of SLTEC loan and the ₱5 billion loan availed by the Parent Company in November 2019.
Pension and other employee benefits
Increase due to the accrual of retirement expense for the period.
Deferred tax liabilities - net
Higher due to the tax effect of the recognition of right of use asset as a result of the application of PFRS 16.
Other noncurrent liabilities
Increase brought about by the purchase of twenty percent (20%) interest of Axia Power in SLTEC on account.
Capital stock
Increase due to the capital infusion of the majority stockholder.
Other equity reserve and non-controlling interests
Due to the effect of the consolidation of SLTEC.
Unrealized fair value gains on equity instruments at FVOCI
Decrease due to the disposal of the shares of stocks held by the Company.
Unrealized fair value losses on derivative instrument designated under hedge accounting
Ineffective portion of the coal hedge entered into by the Parent Company.
Remeasurement losses on defined benefit plan
Losses recorded in 2019 as compared to gain in 2018.
Retained earnings
Went down due to net loss incurred during the period and the impact of the initial application of PFRS 16.

Current ratio and Acid test ratio
Increased due to the higher cash and cash equivalents provided by the issuance of capital stock. On the other hand, current liabilities increased by fifty-one percent (51%) due to increase in purchases on account and taxes payable.
Debt to equity ratio and Asset to equity ratio
Rose due to higher total liabilities and total assets tempered by thirty-three percent (33%) increase in equity resulting from issuance of new shares of stocks.
Interest coverage ratio
Went up due to net income before interest.
Net debt to equity ratio
Increased due to additional ₱5 billion loan availed in November 2019.
Return on equity and assets
Went up due to lower net loss incurred in 2019.
Asset turnover
Went down as revenues increased by only one percent (1%) while average total assets increased by forty-eight percent (48%).

Material events and uncertainties
There were no events that triggered direct or contingent financial obligation that was material to the Company. There were no contingent assets or contingent liabilities since the last annual balance sheet date.
There were no material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships of the Company with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
Except as disclosed in Note 40 (Events after the Reporting Period of the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements), there were no other material events that had occurred subsequent to the balance sheet date.
Capital expenditures are planned to rehabilitate and improve the availability and capacity of generation assets. These will be funded by internal resources.
Any known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that were reasonably expected to have material favorable or unfavorable impact on net revenues/income from continuing operations
- The results of operations of the Company and its subsidiaries depend, to a significant extent, on the performance of the Philippine economy.
- The current highly competitive environment and operation of priority-dispatch variable renewable energy have driven market prices of electricity downward, resulting in lower margins.
- However, limitations in the supply side and unscheduled outages of plants have driven WESM prices upwards. Movements in the WESM prices could have a significant favorable or unfavorable impact on the Company’s financial results.
There were no known trends or any known demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the registrant’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way.
There were no significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations that had material effect on the financial condition or result of operations.
There were no operations subject to seasonality and cyclicality except for the operation of PHINMA RE’s wind farm. The wind regime is high during the northeast monsoon (amihan) season in the first and fourth quarters when wind turbines generate more power to be supplied to the grid. The generation drops in the second and third quarters due to low wind regime brought about by the southwest monsoon (habagat).
