The following discussion and analysis must be read in conjunction with the submitted audited
consolidated financial statements and the related notes to the consolidated financial statements.

The year 2020 was an unusual year as it brings unprecedented challenges due to COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic, which put the Philippines in a state of calamity from March 17, is still sweeping globally as of date of this report. To curb the spread of this novel coronavirus, the governments across the world have implemented safety protocols, stay-at-home orders and varying degrees of lockdown [called community quarantine (“CQ”)3 in the Philippines]. At the onset, the entire Luzon, its associated islands, and practically the whole country were under ECQ for two months, which paralyzed all non-essential activities and public transportation. By the end of the year, most of the country was already under the more relaxed MGCQ while Metro Manila, Batangas, and the cities of Iloilo, Davao and Tacloban continued to be under GCQ.
The Group has conducted business operations in compliance with government directives and protocols amidst complex challenges brought by the localized CQ measures which include non-essential business suspensions, limited public transportation and public gathering restrictions. In all allowed activities and public/work places, the minimum public health standards are followed at all times and contactless connections are promoted. Prolonged physical meetings are discouraged, online interactions are encouraged, and alternative work arrangements such as shifts, rotation, skeletal force and work-from-home are implemented. Transport service and health and safety guards (face masks, face shields, alcohol, vitamin C and personal protective equipment) are provided to employees and workers. By the end of the year, public transportation, dine-in services and mass gatherings are still limited at about 50% capacity; curfew is still in effect; and only hotels with accreditation from the Department of Tourism are allowed to accommodate guests and clients.
The Group has diversified revenue streams, either by type of products or by geographic locations, that help mitigate the impact of the pandemic-related lockdown restrictions. The complex challenges of the CQ measures resulted in a downturn in the Group’s growth trajectory with revenues and income, net profit, and net profit to owners sliding by 28%, 62% and 50%, respectively, as compared to a year ago, to end the year with P128.8 billion revenues and income, P10.3 billion net profit and P8.8 billion net profit to owners. Net losses were reported by Travellers and GADC that further pulled down the consolidated bottom line. Nevertheless, net profit rate was registered at 8% as compared to 15% a year ago, while net-profit-to-owners rate was at 7% versus 10% a year ago.
The Group saw 22%, 77% and 48% growths quarter-on-quarter in revenues and income, net profit and net profit to owners in fourth quarter, respectively, as the COVID-19 restrictions gradually eased towards the Christmas season.
Megaworld, one of the country’s property giants, reported year-on-year declines in its revenues and income, net profit and net profit to owners of 35%, 45% and 45%, respectively, which reportedly amounted to P43.5 billion, P10.6 billion and P9.9 billion, respectively, due to curtailment in activities brought by the pandemic restrictions. Net profit rate remained healthy at 24% as compared to 29% a year ago. Through continuous innovation and strengthened relationships with customers and retail partners, the group was able to preserve profitability.
Real estate sales amounted to P24.9 billion, down 42% from P42.6 billion a year ago due to fewer reservations, limited selling activities and restricted construction activities. Megaworld implemented more flexible payment terms during the lockdown period. Sales reservations amounted to P68.1 billion during the year, with around P7.8 billion worth of new project launches particularly in The Upper East Bacolod, Iloilo Business Park, Capital Town Pampanga and Hamptons Caliraya Laguna. The Megaworld-GERI-Empire East-Suntrust/SLI brands turned over 52-15-17-16 of real estate sales. The brands sold well in Quezon City, Pasig City, Pasay City and Taguig which constitute 53% of real estate sales.
Rental income slid 23% to P12.9 billion primarily due to temporary closure of malls, rent concessions and lower foot traffic on reopening. Rentals from its office leasing arm, Megaworld Premier Offices amounted to P10.4 billion, at about the same level as last year. Around 135-thousand sqm of fresh office spaces were leased out in Iloilo, Quezon City and Fort Bonifacio, mainly for expansion programs of existing office partners and the rest from new clients. Around 145-thousand sqm of offices spaces were also renewed by various company tenants during the year. Around 87-thousand sqm of office spaces were completed during the year, bringing the total leasable office inventory to 1.4 million sqm. Megaworld Lifestyle Malls brought in P2.5B rentals. Megaworld offered deferment of monthly rent without penalty until the end of the year and waived certain rental charges of mall tenants and retail partners affected by the lockdown when non-essential shops were temporarily closed.
Revenues from the hotel business shrank 42% to P1.5 billion due to temporary closure of hotels, travel bans and limited hotel operations allowed under CQ guidelines for the tourism and hospitality industry. Since dine-in is still restricted, Megaworld hotels began offering curated gourmet meals available for pick-up, take-out and delivery.
In the last quarter of 2020, however, remarkable signs of recovery were seen as real estate grew 22%, lifestyle malls 24% and hotels 25%, quarter-on-quarter as the quarantine measures eased for the holiday season.
Megaworld group’s operating results brought in 33%, 100% and 79% of AGI’s consolidated revenues and income, net profit and net profit to owners, respectively.
Emperador, the world’s largest brandy company and owner of the world’s 5th largest Scotch whisky manufacturer in the world, exhibited strong results during the year amidst the pandemic challenges. Net profit to owners soared 18% year-on-year to a record-high of P8.0 billion while revenues went up 2% year-on-year to reported P52.8 billion, attesting to the strength of the Group’s diversified portfolio and global operations. While on-trade and global travel retail had been affected by the lockdowns and liquor bans, EMP group took advantage of the buoyant off-trade and e-commerce channels as well as new open markets to increase sales. Emperador was able to navigate through the challenges, adapting to the new consumption trends and streamlining efficiencies. Gross profit margin remained healthy at 31% while net profit to owners margin was higher at15% as compared to 13% a year ago.
The Brandy segment realized a 20% soar in net profit to owners to P5.7billion from P4.8 billion a year ago as it turned over P36.9 billion revenues from external customers, down 2% year-on-year. The business was affected by the two-month hard lockdown from mid-March up to mid-May, when local production and distribution were completely suspended in compliance with government directive, and the liquor bans imposed in most localities. While Bodegas Fundador was able to continue its regular production and distribution in Jerez, on-trade sales was affected but off-trade and e-commerce were strong and international market resilient. When borders began opening up in June, sales picked up in Europe, Asia and Americas. ‘Terry Centenario’ remained as the fastest growing brandy and market leader in Spain cornering about one-fourth of the market. ‘Emperador’ garnered a leading 37%share of the market volume of the top three local manufacturers in the Philippines. The segment’s gross profit margin slightly moved to 28% due to product mix and spike of cost inputs from abroad. The segment’s net profit to owners’ rate improved to 15% as the group observed prudence in its operating expenditures.
The Scotch Whisky segment ended the year with P16.0 billion revenues to external customers, a 14% surge year-on-year, with net profit to owners growing at the same14%pace year-on-year to P2.3billion. Business in UK accelerated during the year as consumers sought out our brands in the off-trade and e- commerce channels while on-trade was effectively shut March-July and restrictions reimposed (so that not all premises were open) from November. Single malts ‘Jura’ and ‘Tamnavulin’ captured the first and fifth positions of fastest-growing malt brands in UK while blended ‘Whyte & Mackay’ captured the fastest-growing blended whisky brand, as their sales soared to double-digit growths in UK. Similarly, sales of ‘Harveys’ had increased in UK. As markets opened up, exports to Asia picked up from second quarter continuing through the rest of the year. While markets from Europe, Latin America, Africa and Middle East had been affected by the varying stages and degrees of lockdown, good growths were seen for the single malts in North America, developing markets and Europe. Global Travel Retail was the most challenged channel as most airports have remained closed and restricted. The segment’s gross profit margin was registered at 36% primarily due to shift in product mix. Tight control on strategic marketing and other operating expenses (normally associated with on-trade and Travel Retail) boosted net profit and net profit rates.
Gross profit margins (“GPM”) on consolidated level remained healthy at 31% in 2020 and 34% in 2019. The slight swing was attributed to product mix, spike of inputs abroad and promotional bundling, especially towards the last quarter of the year in time for the Christmas season. The GPMs of the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments were respectively posted at 28% and 36% in 2020 as compared to 30% and 40% in 2019.
EMP Group accounted for 41% of AGI’s consolidated revenues and income, 82% of consolidated net profit and 81% of consolidated net profit to owners.
Travellers, the owner and operator of RWM, among all the business segments, was hit the hardest by the pandemic-related measures imposed by the government that restricted foot traffic, local and international travel and tourism and the accommodation and dining services. These disruptions resulted in 57% decline in net revenues reported for the year to P12.2 billion, not enough to support the cost and expenses that pulled the bottom line 7times down from P0.9 billion to P5.5 billion in the red.
Gross gaming revenues plunged 52% to P13.3 billion. Casino drops fell 49% year-on-year and blended win rate was at 5%. Average daily property visitation decreased 73% in 2020. The casino layout was rearranged to maximize capacity while strictly adhering to the minimum health protocols.
Non-gaming revenues from hotel accommodations downscaled 58% to P2.1 billion due to check-in decline. Hotel blended occupancy rate averaged 51%. Hotel rooms were converted as temporary quarantine room facilities for Overseas Filipino Workers. New service offerings were tapped to improve occupancy rates, including WFH (Work from Hotel) packages, special staycation packages for frontliners and locally stranded individuals, and virtual meeting packages plus the E-Concierge mobile app. Other revenues shrank 60% to P0.7 billion due to restrictions affecting theater, cinemas and mall operations.
In the last quarter of the year, revenues picked up 43% quarter-on-quarter (gaming 44%, non-gaming 40%) while net profit improved 28times quarter-on-quarter.
Travellers contributed 9%, -55% and -32% to AGI’s consolidated revenues and income, consolidated net profit, and consolidated net profit to owners, respectively.
GADC, the master franchise holder of McDonald’s in the Philippines which is a strategic partnership with the George Yang group, ended the year with core revenues reaching P19.8 billion and net profit sliding to P0.6 billion in the red, which were 38% and 131% behind last year, respectively. Same-store sales contracted 41% year-on-year while system-wide sales went down 38% from a year ago. The low results were the effects of the long-standing CQ restrictions (in different phases) nationwide that cut foot traffic in the stores and put constraints in operations and customer spending. Being in the food service, which is an essential business, McDonald’s restaurants operated for delivery, drive-through and take-out orders, with no or limited dine-in (depending on CQ stage in the locality, up to 50% capacity allowed) at limited hours (due to curfew) and menu (due to available ingredients) from mid- March. Initially, when dine-in and large gatherings were not allowed, about 38% of stores remained operational; and, as the restrictions gradually eased, more stores resumed operations that by year-end 95% have re-opened as allowed by the local governments where the restaurants are located. A total of sixteen (16) stores were opened while thirty (30) non-performing ones were closed during the year, to end the year with 655 stores as compared to 669 stores at the beginning of the year.
Convenience through its delivery and drive-thru channels significantly contributed to sales recovery, accounting for 19% and 29% of system-wide sales for the year. Within McDelivery, innovation played a critical role as digital sales comprise bulk of total delivery sales - with aggressive expansion and programs with food aggregators like Grab Food and Food Panda, and continued push for the McDelivery app. As delivery boosted growth, McDonald’s promoted bundles or group meals for in-home consumption and free delivery for a minimum purchase amount.
Business was already improving in the second half of the year with net profit of P0.4 billion realized in the fourth quarter, a 246% increase quarter-on-quarter, as core revenues increased 25% quarter-on- quarter. System-wide sales in the fourth quarter grew 31% quarter-on-quarter.
The group has maintained positive cash flows from operations during the year and secured funding from local banks, thereby sustaining strong financial position at year-end.
These operating results translated into 16%, -5% and -3% of the consolidated revenues and income, net profit and net profit to owners of AGI and subsidiaries, respectively.
Revenues and other income, as a result of the foregoing, reached P128.8 billion in 2020, a 28% or P51.2 billion drop from P180.0 billion in 2019. Sale of goods (real estate, alcoholic beverages, snack products) went down 18% or P16.5 billion to P77.0 billion from P93.5 billion a year ago, due to the 42% decline in real estate sales. Service revenues (QSR, gaming, rentals, hotels, cinemas) decelerated 41% or P33.5 billion to P47.5 billion from P81.0 billion a year ago, due to reduction in all revenues under this account. Share in net profits of associates and joint ventures decreased by 36% or P65 million, mainly from losses incurred by MEG’s associates this year.
Finance and other income went down 21% or P1.1 billion, due to lower interest income and foreign currency gains this year. There were also gains related to finance lease (P0.4 billion) and to sale and dilution of investments (P0.3 billion) in 2019 but none in 2020.
Cost and expenses shrank 21% or P30.2 billion to P113.9 billion from P144.1 billion in 2019. Cost of goods sold decreased 13% or P7.4 billion to P49.7 billion in 2020 mainly due to contraction in real estate sales resulting in contraction in related costs. Cost of services decreased 34% or P14.0 billion to P27.3 billion for the year due to decline in business activities in gaming and company-owned QSR. Other operating expenses also dipped 24% or P9.4 billion to P29.3 billion due to reduced business activities.
Finance costs and other charges went up 7% or P0.5 billion to P7.6 billion mainly from higher interest expense of Travellers, GADC and MEG attributed to their new borrowings during the year.
Tax expense went down 47% or P4.1 billion to P4.6 billion due to lower taxable income of Megaworld, GADC and EMP attributable to reduced business activities during the year.
Net Profit totaled P10.3 billion this year, 62% down year-on-year from P27.1 billion in 2019, with net profit to owners down 50% to P8.8 billion.

Consolidated total assets amounted to P668.9 billion at end of 2020 from P644.5 billion at beginning of year. The Group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 2.0 times. Current assets amounted to P316.4 billion while current liabilities amounted to P155.8 billion at end of the current year.
For most of the balance sheet accounts, there is a corresponding note found in the audited consolidated financial statements where details, breakdown or composition of the accounts are presented. Please refer to those notes accompanying the consolidated financial statements. In summary, for accounts with at least +/-5% year-on-year changes:
Cash and cash equivalents increased 36% or P18.4 billion to end the year with P69.7 billion from P51.3 billion at the beginning of the year, primarily from net cash flows generated internally and net proceeds from debts during the year, particularly from MEG and GADC. Cash flows from operating, financing and investing activities during the period were presented in the consolidated statements of cash flows.
Current trade and other receivables went down 9% or P6.4 billion mainly from collections mostly from debtors of Megaworld and Emperador who had larger balances at the beginning of the year. Real estate selling activities were limited by restricted construction activities during the year.
Contract assets, which represent the reclassified portion of trade and other receivables relating to rights to payment which are conditioned upon the completion of units sold and represent excess of progress of work over the right to an amount of consideration, went up 22% or P2.4 billion for the currently maturing assets and non-currently maturing assets decreased 21% or P1.7 billion.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss depleted by 19% or P2.3 billion from net disposals during the year.
Other current assets slid 6% or P1.1 billion mainly due to decreases in MEG’s input vat and creditable withholding taxes, and EMP’s timing of general prepayments, deferred input vat and prepaid taxes.
Financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income declined 5% or P0.02 billion from disposals and fair value loss from marked-to-market valuation.
Advances to landowners and joint operators increased 6% or P0.4 billion from advances made by Megaworld to joint partners.
Deferred tax assets surged 16% or P0.9 billion significantly from deferred tax assets of GADC and EMP, attributable to timing differences mainly on their lease liabilities in excess of their right-of-use assets, retirement benefit obligation, net operating loss carry-over and minimum corporate income tax.
Other non-current assets grew 12% or P0.8 billion from Megaworld’s higher deferred commissions and the deposit it made for cancellation of perpetual securities, as reduced by decrease in Travellers’ advances for future investments made to PAGCOR as a result of parcels of land it received during the year.
Non-current asset held for sale increased 24% or P1.0 billion from EMP’s land and building intended for sale in 2021 up to three years after the end of COVID-19 pandemic. Such were reclassified from Property, Plant and Equipment.
Trade and other payables went up 18% or P10.8 billion from Travellers’ P9.9 billion deposit from SUN and increase in trade payables. The payment received from SUN is in connection with the development and construction of a hotel casino on a lot being leased by SUN from WCRWI under a co-development agreement between the two parties. Dividends payable went up due to dividends declaration by Megaworld and the Parent Company which are payable in 2021. Accrued interest payable was higher at year-end due to new interest-bearing debts drawn during the year.
Current interest-bearing loans leaped 21% or P8.7 billion while non-current interest-bearing loans dropped 10% or P13.9 billion, for a net decrease of P5.2 billion, as a result of net repayments by Travellers (P2.6 billon), Megaworld (P5.7 billion), Emperador (P1.6 billion) and AGGC(P2.0 billion); and net incurrences by GADC (P1.6 billion) and AGI (P5.0 billion).
Current and Non-current lease liabilities were accounts brought about by the adoption of PFRS 16- Leases beginning January 1, 2019. These amounted to P1.3 billion and P14.6 billion, respectively, at the end of 2019 and increased by 10% or P0.1 billion and 8% or P1.2 billion, respectively, during the year; thereby ending the year with P1.4 billion and P15.9 billion.
Contract liabilities represent MEG’s excess of collection over the progress of work under MEG, with current portion increasing 55% or P0.9 billion and non-current portion decreasing 9% or P0.3 billion.
Income tax payable decreased 24% or P0.6 billion, mainly from lower taxable income.
Other current liabilities went up 26% or P5.2 billion primarily due to increases in Megaworld’s deferred rental, commissions payable, advances from customers, and derivative liability; and reclassification of Emperador’s maturing equity-linked securities, net of conversion during the year. On the other hand, Other non-current liabilities decreased by 26% or P4.0 billion mainly from the reclassification of currently maturing portion of equity-linked securities, and reduction of Traveller’s retention liabilities.
Bonds payable surged 64% or P15.7 billion due to issuance of Megaworld’s seven-year senior 4.125% unsecured notes totaling $350 million which shall mature on July 30, 2027.
Retirement benefit obligation increased 10% or P0.2 billion from higher present value of the obligation this year as compared to last year, as a result of remeasurement loss and current service and interest costs, less the effects of foreign currency adjustment. .
Non-current redeemable preferred shares, dipped 7% or P0.1 billion due to the redemption of preferred shares of TLC.
Deferred tax liabilities went up 9% or P1.4 billion primarily due to the tax effect capitalized interest, right- of-use assets, capitalized interest and brand valuation.
The changes in equity components are presented in detail in the consolidated statements of changes in equity. The equity attributable to owners increased 2% mainly due to net profit during the year, while non-controlling interest decreased 4% or P5.2 billion due to dividend declared by investee. Treasury shares pertain to the acquisition cost of the shares that have been brought back from the market pursuant to the AGI’s ongoing buyback program.

The consolidated statements of financial position showed strong liquidity with current assets exceeding current liabilities 2.1times, 2.3times and 3.0times at end of 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Total- liabilities-to-equity ratios were at 1.2:1 at end 2020 and 2019 and 1.0:1 at the end of 2018, while interest-bearing-debt-to-total-equity ratios were correspondingly at 74%, 70%, and 68%. Assets exceeded liabilities 2times and equity 2times as well at end-2020, 2019 and 2018.
In general, working capital was sourced internally from operations and bank loans during the year. In the ensuing year, the Group expects to meet its working capital and investment requirements from operating cash flows and debt. It may also from time to time seek other sources of funding, if necessary, depending on its financing needs and market conditions.

AGI has a proven track record of creating value over time and is confident in its ability to deliver sustainable profitable growth and value for its stakeholders, backed by its overall resilience and adaptability. The Group is recalibrating its strategies, particularly on its market focus, in order to achieve a more balanced portfolio as the conglomerate prepares for post-pandemic scenarios such as shift in market demands, and changes in customer behavior and lifestyle. Innovation, especially on digital technology, will remain to be at the core of its different business operations. The Group will continue to use technology to give the Group an added advantage as we embrace the new reality. It has rolled out a vaccination program to help the government achieve the much-needed herd immunity faster.

There are no other known material events subsequent to the end of the year that would have a material
impact on the current year.
There are no other known trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the Group’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way. The Group does not have nor anticipate having any cash flow or liquidity problems within the next twelve months. AGI and its subsidiaries are not in default or breach of any note, loan, lease or other indebtedness or financing arrangement requiring it to make payments.
There are no other known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is currently considered material to the Group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation.
There are no other material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
There are no other known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. There are also no known events that will cause material change in the relationship between costs and revenues.
There are no other significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations. There were no other material issuances, repurchases or repayments of debt and equity securities.
The business has no seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition and results of operations of the Group.