The compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of the Bank’s asset levels from 2015 to 2017 was 9.5%, driven by the 9.9% increase in deposits. Loans likewise increased over the same period by 14.5%. Capital growth of 7.8% was driven by increasing profits generated annually, net of cash dividends paid.

Total resources ended at P1.90 trillion, P178.2 billion, or 10.3% higher than last year’s P1.73 trillion. Total deposits expanded by P130.9 billion, or 9.1% to P1.56 trillion due to balances growth in time, savings and demand deposits of P69.8 billion, or 18.4%, P40.4 billion, or 4.9%, and P20.7 billion or 8.9%, respectively. Bills payable grew P21.5 billion, or 34.8% on higher external borrowings. Deferred credits and other liabilities increased by P7.8 billion, or 24.3% due to higher foreign acceptances outstanding and miscellaneous liabilities. Derivative financial liabilities grew P1.7 billion or 53.9%, due to higher market valuation of certain derivative products. Due to Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and other banks increased by P548 million or 81.8% due to higher obligations to BSP and external borrowings. On the other hand, Manager’s checks and demand draft outstanding decreased P557 million, or 7.3% due to lower balance of manager’s checks issued.
Capital funds expanded by P15.6 billion, or 9.4% to P180.7 billion, from year-end 2016. Surplus contributed to the capital growth by P17.8 billion, or 18.1%, as a result of accumulated profits net of cash dividend payments. Reserves were down by P2.5 billion, or 90.6%, as a result of the incorporation of the Bank’s trust business. The required reserves for the trust business is now being carried by BPI AMTC.
On the asset side, loans and advances increased P161.6 billion, or 15.5% driven by higher loan demand from corporate loans. Due from Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas likewise increased P16.4 billion, or 6.9% on higher volume of placement in BSP deposits and reserves. Other resources, net grew P3.5 billion, or 28.2% on account of higher miscellaneous assets. Interbank loans receivable and securities purchased under agreements to resell went up P3.4 billion, or 22.0% due to increase in RRP volume and interbank term loans with foreign banks and financial institutions. Derivative financial assets expanded by P2.0 billion, or 66.4%, due to higher positive fair value on certain derivative positions. Bank premises, furniture, fixtures and equipment, net increased by P1.2 billion, or 9.0% due to building renovations and leasehold improvements. Assets attributable to insurance operations increased by P1.1 billion, or 6.6%, due to the Bank’s non-life insurance subsidiary’s higher securities investments and insurance receivables. Deferred income tax assets, net grew P548 million, or 7.3% due to higher allowance for probable loss.
On the other hand, Trading securities declined by P9.3 billion, or 63.5%, due to decrease in holding of securities intended for trading. Due from Other Banks, likewise declined by P8.6 billion, or 37.5%, on lower working balances and placements maintained with correspondent banks. Investment properties, net decreased by P534 million, or 79.8%, due to reclassification of an investment property to bank premises as the Bank decided to use the property for its operations. Investments in subsidiaries and associates, net went down P432 million, or 6.3% on account of the decrease in the Bank’s share in the net income from BPI - Philam.

The bank sustained its healthy mix of loan portfolio broken down into large corporates at 74%, SMEs at 7%, and consumer at 19%.
Allowance for Impairment of P20.7 billion was up by P2.0 billion from last year’s P18.7 billion and also higher than 2015’s P16.4 billion.
Gross 90 days non-performing loans (NPL) ratio as of December 2017 improved to 1.3%, compared to last year’s 1.5%. December 2017’s 30 day net NPL ratio (net of fully reserved accounts) per BSP definition ended at 0.5%, from December 2016’s 0.5% and 2015’s 0.6%. The Bank’s NPL ratio was better than industry’s average of 1.6% as of December 2017.
BPI shall prudently manage its lending activity and will always be mindful of the credit risks, potential or otherwise, that may be posed by the shifting environment. It will regularly assess its portfolio quality and ensure adequate collateral and reserve coverage. It will continue to resolve outstanding delinquent loans through collection or restructuring, where appropriate.

BPI is one of the industry’s most liquid banks as it derives 95% of its funding from deposits. Its net loan to deposit ratio was 77% in 2017, up from 2016’s 73%, with adequate room to actively finance any surge in loan demand. Currently, excess funds are invested in cash and highly liquid assets as well as in non-risk government securities.

The Bank’s net income from 2015 to 2017 increased by a CAGR of 7.5% as net interest income and non- interest income increased by 11.3% and 3.1%, respectively. However, these improvements in revenues were partly reduced by the higher impairment losses and operating expenses whose 3-year CAGRs were up 10.6% and 8.8%, respectively.

Net income for full year 2017 ended at of P22.4 billion, P366 million, or 1.7% higher than same period last year of P22.1 billion. Total revenues grew by P4.5 billion, but was partly tempered by increases recorded in other expenses and provision for income tax which were up by P3.6 billion, and P1.4 billion, respectively.
Net interest income at P48.0 billion, increased 13.4% from last year’s P42.4 billion on the back of P178.5 billion average asset base expansion.
Interest income increased P7.5 billion, or 12.9%, to P65.8 billion from previous year’s P58.3 billion. Interest income on loans and advances were up by P7.7 billion, or 15.8%, due to the P147.7 billion increase in average loan volume, partly tempered by the 3 basis points drop in loan yield. Interest income on trading securities also increased P21 million, or 11.7%, on account of higher volume and yield. On the other hand, interest income on available-for-sale securities declined by P111 million, or 23.7%, largely on account of lower volume. GRT increased P219 million, or 11.0%, as a result of higher interest income.
Interest expense was up by P1.9 billion to P17.8 billion, from last year’s P15.9 billion. This increase was primarily driven by interest expense on deposits, which grew by P1.4 billion, or 8.9% on account of the average asset base expansion partly tempered by lower deposit cost. Interest expense on bills payable and other borrowings also increased P516 million, or 81.4%, driven by higher volume and cost.
Other income at P23.0 billion, was lower by P1.2 billion, or 4.9%, from P24.2 billion last year. Other operating income increased by P2.4 billion, or 27.0% mainly due to higher credit card income and profit from assets sold. Income from foreign exchange trading increased by P396 million, or 20.3%, from gains on proprietary positions and retail sales. The drop in other income was accounted for by the P4.4 billion, or 81.4%, decline in trading gain (loss) on securities as the Bank booked a one-off gain derived from the sale of the reclassified portion of certain held-to-maturity securities to AFS in 2016.
Other expenses at P38.5 billion, increased P3.6 billion, or 10.3% from last year’s P34.9 billion. Other operating expenses increased P2.0 billion, or 17.4%, on product-related insurance premiums, third party fees and commissions, litigation expenses, and transaction related costs. Occupancy and equipment-related expenses grew by P1.2 billion, or 11.7% owing to increase in rent expense, depreciation and amortization costs, and significant spending on technology.
Impairment losses stood at P3.8 billion, P1.0 billion, or 20.9% lower than the previous year, as loan provisioning was slowed down.
Provision for income tax at P6.0 billion, up P1.4 billion, or 31.3% from P4.5 billion. Current taxes rose by P1.0 billion, or 18.4%, due to higher proportions of Bank pre-tax earnings that are exposed to ordinary corporate income tax. Deferred taxes decreased P422 million, or 47.7% on account of the impairment losses set up for the year, and accounts with timing difference.
Income attributable to non-controlling interest increased P95 million, or 42.2%, on account of higher income from the Bank’s non-life insurance subsidiary.


Total comprehensive income was at P22.4 billion, P670 million, or 3.1% higher than last year’s P21.7 billion on the back of increases on Net income before minority interest at P461 million, or 2.1% and other comprehensive income at P337 million or 95.2%.
Net change in fair value reserve on available-for-sale securities increased P170 million or 31.3% on account of higher market valuation of the Bank’s investment securities. Fair value reserve on investments of insurance subsidiaries, also increased P327 million, or 249.6%, as a result of higher market valuation of the insurance subsidiaries’ investment funds. Currency translation differences likewise increased by P239 million, or 211.5% due to the general weakening of the Philippine peso. Share in other comprehensive loss of associates increased P178 million, or 240.5% due to the downward market valuation of the investments of the bancassurance affiliate.
Actuarial losses on defined benefit plan, net of tax effect decreased P307 million, or 53.0% as impacted by the change in financial assumption.
Comprehensive income attributable to non-controlling interest increased P128 million, or 69.2% due to higher market valuation of the insurance subsidiaries’ investments.

The Bank’s key financial performance ratios for the last three years showed consistent profitability and adequate capitalization. The same ratios are also used to evaluate the performance of the bank’s subsidiaries.
Return on equity (ROE), the ratio of net income to average equity at 12.7% was lower, compared to last year’s 13.8% due to the faster growth in average equity at 9.8% versus growth in net income of 1.7%.
Return on assets (ROA), the ratio of net income to average assets, also improved to 1.3%, was slightly lower than 2016 at 1.4% due to faster growth in average assets at 11.3% as compared to growth in net income.
Net interest margin (NIM), the ratio of net interest income to average interest bearing assets, at 2.9%, improved by 6 basis points on the combined impact of the increase in yields and growth in average interest earning assets.
Operating efficiency (cost to income) ratio, the ratio of operating expenses to income, increased to 54.3% from last year’s 52.5% as increase in operating expenses outpaced revenue growth.
Capital adequacy ratio (CAR), computed using the standard risk weights assigned to the Bank’s assets compared with its qualifying capital, measures the capability of Bank’s capital funds to cover its various business risks. The Bank’s CAR under the Basel III framework was recorded at 12.7% versus 13.0% previously. Increase in risk weighted assets, driven by higher loan portfolio, outpaced the increase in qualifying capital. This year’s CAR and Common Equity Tier 1 (CET 1) ratios remained above the BSP requirements. The Bank’s capital is composed largely of CET 1 capital.

Other than the disclosure enumerated above, the bank has nothing to report on the following:
a) Any known trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will have a material impact on its liquidity.
b) Events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the company, including any default or acceleration of an obligation.
c) Material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations), and other relationships of the bank with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
d) Any material commitments for capital expenditures.
e) Any known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales/revenues/income from continuing operations.
f) Any significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from the Bank’s continuing operations.
g) Any seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition or results of operations.

The Philippine Economy will continue to grow by 6.7% or more in 2018 as government’s planned infrastructure spending go into full swing. The inflation environment in the Philippines has remained stable for two consecutive years and is forecasted to accelerate slightly to 3.4% in 2018 as oil prices recover and the initial short-term impact of the Tax Reform for Acceleration and Inclusion (TRAIN) law implementation takes effect.
The Philippine peso is still expected to weaken mildly and gradually versus the major currencies in the medium term given the enormous need for foreign currencies to fund capital spending.
A minimal, if any, monetary policy tightening response is expected from the BSP which could translate to a modest and somewhat healthy increase in domestic interest rates. A sizeable increase in the government’s deficit and borrowing requirement will also exert upward pressure on domestic interest rates but is unlikely to lead to an unmanageable surge in borrowing costs as competition among financial market players continue to intensify.
Against this backdrop of a growing economy, BPI will continue to grow its corporate and retail client base. The Bank believes its growth will be driven by its strong focus on the country’s growing market of middle class, emergence of small-and-medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and the self-employed micro entrepreneurs (SEME), and heightened activity of large corporate and government entities. The Bank is also positioned to capitalize on more substantial capital flows arising from natural activity in the foreign exchange markets from retail and corporate clients, as well as regulations that increasingly direct flows to more stringently regulated banks.

The economic environment of the country is expected to remain stable in the medium to long term given sustained consumer spending. In contrast to other countries, the Philippines has a relatively young population that can drive consumption. The strong domestic market can provide the cushion needed to counter a possible decline in global trade and demand.
Nevertheless, consistent growth above 7% can only be achieved if the country’s infrastructure gaps are addressed. Lower transportation and electricity costs resulting from infrastructure development will attract foreign businesses to the country, especially those involved in manufacturing. The implementation of the government’s infrastructure program is crucial in expanding the productive capacity of the economy.
In the medium term, BPI intends to capitalize on the Philippines’ stable economic growth by further investing in its already significant corporate and retail banking franchises, to make it well-positioned to tap opportunities in (i) the growing market of middle-class Filipinos and (ii) thriving SMEs and (iii) underbanked areas in the microfinance segments, and other opportunities related to increased economic activity and investments from offshore investors, multinational and regional corporations. It also intends to continue to capitalize on the strong cross-selling opportunities to offer the investment banking products of BPI Capital to its corporate clients.
The Bank intends to leverage its preeminent brand name and continue to innovate and offer value- added products and services to address the complex needs of its clients, while further enhancing client convenience and satisfaction by delivering services through integrated physical, electronic and call center facilities.
The Bank will also continue to focus on building its operational and distribution infrastructure. BPI will further strengthen its operational and financial performance through continued investment in process improvements, organizational alignment, management and information systems, and proactive engagement and compensation systems for human resources.