
The Group had expanded its geographic footprint both in the Philippines and across the globe. From the Philippines, it found ground in Spain in early 2013 and February 2014, with the acquisition of Bodega San Bruno and investment in Bodega Las Copas (“BLC”), respectively. From Spain, business opportunity knocked in UK and so the Group acquired Whyte and Mackay (“WMG”) in October 2014. The Group returned its sight in Spain with the acquisition of brandy and sherry business under Bodegas Fundador in March 2016 (a deal inked in November 2015) and the acquisition of Domecq brandy and wine brand portfolio and related assets in March 2017 (a deal inked in December 2016, and transferred/consolidated to the Group in September 2017). These provided platforms for international expansion and domestic premiumization for Emperador.
Having set the groundworks, Emperador moved on to brand investments geared towards premiumization.
The Group is presented into two segments: Scotch Whisky (representing the UK operations) and Brandy (representing the Philippine and Spanish operations, including the Fundador and Domecq operations starting March 2016 and September 2017, respectively). BLC is a joint venture which is accounted for under the equity method and reported under the Brandy Segment.


Total revenues climbed P47,050 million in 2018, up 10.3% from P42,656 million a year ago attributed to continuing sales growth from both the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments.
The Scotch Whisky segment turned over revenues to external customers higher by 9.0% year- on-year. The business is growing not only in UK but also in other parts of the world, especially in Asia where revenues had more than doubled as brands enjoyed success across a number of markets. The Dalmore, the flagship malt whisky product, was again the major driver of growth for the year as it continued to attract new consumers at the apex of the single malt category through both the Core Range and the Rare Expressions. The new The Dalmore Port Wood Reserve was added to the Core Range with further limited releases of 35YO, 40YO, 45YO, and Vintage Expressions. Jura with its redesigned range and exclusive Global Travel Retail range continued to attract sales. The re-launch of Fettercairn in a new packaging, and the launch of Tamnavulin Vintage Collection in the single malt category in 2018 and the new contemporary blended malt brand Shackleton in 2017 further boost revenues during the year.
The Brandy segment on the other hand, reported revenues to external customers higher by 10.8% year-on-year. The Spanish business is growing in Spain, Philippines, UK and USA, which all together accounted for three-quarters of its revenues. The Spanish brands continued to collect awards and recognitions in international competitions this year – a total of ten gold medals for Fundador, and Terry brandies, highlighting a Trophy for Fundador Supremo 18YO as the Best Grape Brandy at the Hong Kong International Wine & Spirit Competition; and seventeen gold medals and three trophies for Harveys Sherries. Fundador Supremo 18YO, a super-premium Brandy de Jerez, is available in Travel Retail across Europe and Asia, and in the Philippines. On the local front, Emperador Brandy remains the nationwide leader, particularly in key metro cities, amid fierce competition among local brands. Recognizing the preference of the young drinkers for variety and excitement, Emperador created a new offering for Emperador Light drinkers by pairing Emperador Light with Club Mix Lime Cordial, dubbed as ‘LimeLight’ and ‘GreenLight’; and, in mid-September, ‘the gin for the new generation’ The BaR Premium Gin was launched, infused with flavors and botanicals from the gardens of Andalusia, Spain, in Pink, Lime and Premium Dry variants.
Other revenues and income went up 56.9% to P705 million from P449 million a year ago due to higher interest income and dividends, scrap sales and higher net results from BLC which resulted in higher share in net profit recorded for this year.

Total costs and expenses amounted to P38,614 million this year from P34,820 million a year ago, up 10.9% year-on-year primarily from the Brandy business which, including intersegment purchases, increased 13.6% year-on-year while the Scotch Whisky business expanded 2.4%.
Cost of Goods Sold
Costs increased 11.2% primarily due to higher costs in the Brandy segment, which grew faster than sales, while Scotch Whisky segment’s costs saved 4.3% from a year ago. Such increase in the Brandy Segment is attributed to high cost of wine, new bottles and packaging for the new and re/packaged products this year.

Gross profit margins (GPM) on consolidated level remained healthy at 35% in 2018 and 2017. The GPMs of the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments were respectively posted at 32% and 40% in 2018 as compared to 35% and 33% in 2017.
Other operating expenses
Other operating expenses went up 22.0% to P7,478 million from P6,131 million, mainly due to advertising and promotions which include strategic marketing spends (new and repackaged products launched this year by both segments), salaries and employee benefits (due to more employees and new positions created) and travel and transportation (for international sales promotions).

Finance and Other charges shrank 41.6% to P831 million from P1,425 million due to the fixed interest expense on ELS and foreign exchange losses recorded in previous year.

As a result of the foregoing, profit before tax climbed 7.7% to P8,436 million from P7,835 million in 2017.

Tax expense increased 6.9% to P1,607 million from P1,503 million a year ago due to higher taxable income, especially in the Scotch Whisky segment.

As a result of the foregoing, net profit went up 7.8% to P6,829 million from P6,332 million a year ago.

Total revenues reached P42,656 million in 2017 as compared to P41,018 million in 2016, a modest hike of 4.0% attributed to strong sales from offshore subsidiaries. Total sales of the Group improved 4.4% to P42,206 million from P40,447 million a year ago.

The Scotch Whisky segment turned over revenues to external customers higher by 7.2% year- on-year. Own Scotch whisky labels The Dalmore and Jura remained to be the growth drivers, with strong sales of Core Range and Rare Expressions (Dalmore 18, 25, King Alexander III and Vintage) in UK, Asia, USA, Greater Europe, Latin America and Travel Retail. More importantly, the biggest market in Asia is now the biggest Dalmore market in the world. Jura, with new bottle and packaging upgrade, has a significant launch of the re-designed range in the US.

The Brandy segment on the other hand, turned over revenues to external customers higher by 2.8% year-on-year. Spanish brandies Fundador, and Terry Centenario and Harveys Bristol Cream sherry enjoyed a good year, with sales growing in Spain, UK and the Philippines. It was a challenging year for Emperador Brandy.

Other revenues and income went down 21.3% to P449 million this year due to lower net results from BLC which resulted in lower share in net profit recorded for this year, and the foreign exchange gains reported in 2016.

Total costs and expenses amounted to P34,820 million in 2017 from P31,582 million a year ago, up 10.2% year-on-year primarily from the Brandy business which, including intersegment purchases, increased 14.8% year-on-year.
Cost of Goods Sold
Costs increased 8.4% primarily due to higher costs in the Brandy segment, which grew faster than sales, while Scotch Whisky segment’s costs inched 5.9% from a year ago. Such increase is attributed to high cost of wine, new bottles and packaging for the new and re/packaged products this year.

Gross profit margins (GPM) on consolidated level remained healthy at 35% in 2017 and 38% in 2016. The GPMs of the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments were respectively posted at 35% and 33% in 2017 and 40% and 30% in 2016.

Other operating expenses were up 8.6% to P6,131 million from P5,647 million, mainly due to advertising and promotions which include strategic marketing spends (new products launched this year Terry White in Spain, Shackleton in UK, Emperador Hotshot and RED in Philippines), salaries and employee benefits (due to more employees and new positions created) and supplies (UK is changing datalinks network to all locations, which would result in fall in telephone costs in the long run). Professional fees went down from Brandy business’s professional fees paid in 2016.


Other charges swelled 79.4% to P1,425 million from P794 million due to unrealized foreign exchange loss and the interest expense on new loans reported by Spain.

As a result of the foregoing, profit before tax ebbed 17.0% to P7,835 million from P9,436 million in 2016.

Tax expense was reduced by 13.7% to P1,503 million from P1,742 million a year ago due to lower taxable income.

As a result of the foregoing, net profit clipped by 17.7% to P6,332 million from P7,693 million a year ago.

Total assets amounted to P117,818 million as of December 31, 2018, a 5.6% increase from P111,536 million as of December 31, 2017. The Group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 2.8 times by the end of the current year.
Cash and cash equivalents were depleted 38.7% or P3,934 million mainly from the parent’s dividend payment (P2,399 million) and purchase of treasury shares (P1,529 million) during the year.
Trade and other receivables went up 28.4% or P4,181 million, primarily due to higher sales in the lead up to Christmas holidays and advances to suppliers and related party.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss went up by P1,189 million from end-2017 due to the acquisition of financial instruments which are classified as such during the year.
Inventories expanded 12.7% or P3,209 million, primarily due to additional cased stocks from the new products and the fillings of Scotch whisky due to high product demand.
Prepayments and other current assets rose 35.4% or P338 million due to general prepayments and input vat. These are mostly due to timing of prepayments.
The current interest-bearing loans increased 37.0% or P1,539 million while non-current portion decreased 1.6% or P446 million, for P1,092 net increase, from new loans drawn locally (for inventory purchases) and in UK (for purchase of fillings of Scotch whisky), net of repayments made during the year.
Trade and other payables went up 9.6% or P1,159 million, mainly from trade payables representing obligations to various suppliers of raw materials such as alcohol, molasses, flavorings and other supplies and accruals incurred by the group.

Income tax payable escalated 106% or P639 million primarily from higher unpaid income taxes by the Group at current year-end which is further attributed to higher taxable profit.
Provisions refer to the amount provided by WMG for leased properties located in Scotland. Provisions went up by 18.4% or P82 million due additional provisions made during the year.
Deferred tax liabilities are attributed to the UK group. These are net of deferred tax assets of EDI and AWGI.
Accumulated translation adjustments refer to the difference resulting in the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ financial statements to Philippine pesos. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the closing rate and income and expenses at average exchange rates. The accumulated balance of the account is reflective of the depreciation in the value of Philippine peso and/or foreign currencies.
Treasury shares pertain to the acquisition cost of the shares that have been brought back from the market pursuant to the Company’s ongoing buyback program.
Share options pertain to the options granted to qualified employees of the Group pursuant to an approved employee share option plan. The increment of 46.5% or P27 million was a result of recognition of additional share options for the year with a corresponding debit to Investments in EDI account.
Revaluation reserves shoot up by P157 million due to actuarial gain on retirement benefit obligations booked by WMG.
Legal reserves represents the statutory requirements in Luxembourg which comprise of net wealth tax reserve and capital reserve at year-end. In 2018, grant received by GES in Spain were added as part of this account.
Non-controlling interest pertains to the minority interest in DBLC, a newly-incorporated subsidiary consolidated by end-2017 and in Boozylife Inc., a 51% newly-acquired local company engaged in the trading of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages.


The Group sourced funds from operations and loans and borrowings. The Company expects to meet its working capital requirements for the e n s u i n g y e a r primarily from available funds at year- end plus cash flows from operations. It may also from time to time seek other sources of funding, if necessary, which may include debt or equity financings, depending on its financing needs and market conditions.

The Group’s renowned brandy and whisky products sold all over the world are the catalyst for continued growth and best position the Group, with its high-quality aged inventory, for premiumization and innovation opportunities.

Except for what have been noted:
There were no other known material events subsequent to the end of the year that would have a material impact in the current year.
There are no other known trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the Group’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way. The Group does not have nor anticipate having any cash flow or liquidity problems. The Group is not in default or breach of any note, lease or other indebtedness or financing arrangement requiring it to make payments.
There are no other known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is currently considered material to the Group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation. There are no other material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
There are no other known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. There are also no known events that will cause material change in the relationship between costs and revenues.
There are no other significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations.
There were no other material issuances, repurchases or repayments of debt and equity securities.
The business has no seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition and results of operations of the Group.
