The Group had expanded its geographic footprint both in the Philippines and across the globe. From the Philippines, it found ground in Spain in early 2013 and February 2014, with the acquisition of Bodega San Bruno and investment in Bodega Las Copas (“BLC”), respectively. From Spain, business opportunity knocked in UK so the Group acquired Whyte and Mackay (“WMG”) in October 2014. The Group returned its sight in Spain with the acquisition of brandy and sherry business under Bodegas Fundador in March 2016 (a deal inked in November 2015) and the acquisition of Domecq brandy and wine brand portfolio and related assets in March 2017 (a deal inked in December 2016, and transferred/consolidated to the Group in September 2017). These provided platforms for international expansion and domestic premiumization for Emperador.
Having set the groundworks, Emperador moved on to brand investments in 2017.
BLC is a joint venture which is accounted for under the equity method.
The Group is presented into two segments: Scotch Whisky (representing the UK operations) and Brandy (representing the Philippine and Spanish operations, including the Fundador and Domecq operations starting March 2016 and September 2017, respectively).

Total revenues reached P42,656 million this year as compared to P41,018 million a year ago, a modest hike of 4.0% attributed to strong sales from offshore subsidiaries.
The Scotch Whisky segment turned over revenues to external customers higher by 7.2% year- on-year. Own Scotch whisky labels The Dalmore and Jura remained to be the growth drivers, with strong sales of Core Range and Rare Expressions (Dalmore 18, 25, King Alexander III and Vintage) in UK, Asia, USA, Greater Europe, Latin America and Travel Retail. More importantly, the biggest market in Asia is now the biggest Dalmore market in the world. Jura, with new bottle and packaging upgrade, has a significant launch of the re-designed range in the US.
The Brandy segment on the other hand, turned over revenues to external customers higher by 2.8% year-on-year. Spanish brandies Fundador, and Terry Centenario and Harveys Bristol Cream sherry enjoyed a good year, with sales growing in Spain, UK and the Philippines. It was a challenging year for Emperador Brandy. Total sales of the Group improved 4.4% to P42,206 million from P40,447 million a year ago.
Other revenues went down 21.3% to P449 million this year due to lower net results from BLC which resulted in lower share in net profit recorded for this year, and the foreign exchange gains reported in 2016.

Total costs and expenses amounted to P34,820 million this year from P31,582 million a year ago, up 10.2% year-on-year primarily from the Brandy business which, including intersegment purchases, increased 14.8% year-on-year.
Cost of Goods Sold
Costs increased 8.5% primarily due to higher costs in the Brandy segment, which grew faster than sales, while Scotch Whisky segment’s costs inched 2.2% from a year ago. Such increase is attributed to high cost of wine, new bottles and packaging for the new and re/packaged products this year.

Gross profit margins (GPM) on consolidated level remained healthy at 35% in 2017 and 37% in 2016. The GPMs of the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments were respectively posted at 35% and 30% in 2017 and 40% and 28% in 2016.
Other operating expenses
Other operating expenses were up 8.3% to P5,810 million from P5,364 million, mainly due to advertising and promotions which include strategic marketing spends (new products launched this year Terry White in Spain, Shackleton in UK, Emperador Hotshot and RED in Philippines), salaries and employee benefits (due to more employees and new positions created) and supplies (UK is changing datalinks network to all locations, which would result in fall in telephone costs in the long run). Professional fees went down from Brandy business’s professional fees paid in 2016.

Other charges swelled 79.4% to P1,425 million from P794 million due to unrealized foreign exchange loss and the interest expense on new loans reported by Spain.

As a result of the foregoing, profit before tax ebbed 17.0% to P7,835 million from P9,436 million in 2016.

Tax expense was reduced by 13.7% to P1,503 million from P1,742 million a year ago due to lower taxable income.

As a result of the foregoing, net profit clipped by 17.7% to P6,332 million from P7,693 million a year ago.

Total assets amounted to P111,536 million as of December 31, 2017, a 18.3% increase from P94,302 million as of December 31, 2016. The Group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 3.04 times by the end of the current year.
Trade and other receivables rose 38.5% or P4,146 million, primarily due to higher sales in the lead up to Christmas holidays and advances to suppliers for raw materials for the second distillery in Batañgas (which started operations in mid-March 2018). There were also receivables from the newly- consolidated Mexican subsidiaries at year-end.
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss at end-2017 represent gains on market valuation of financial instruments which were a reversal of loss valuation at end-2016 which, in turn, was shown under financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss.
Inventories increased by 21.4% or P4,432 million, primarily due to inventories at Domecq and Bodegas Garvey and higher fillings of Scotch whisky. There were also new packaging materials purchased for aged Scotch whisky and for brandy products.
Prepayments and other current assets soared 63.8% or P371 million due to additions coming from Spain, particularly from the new subsidiaries DBLC and CBSP and from Fundador. These are mostly due to timing of prepayments.
Investment in a joint venture, which pertains to Investment in BLC, decreased by 19.1% or P765 million primarily from the reduction in capitalization at BLC which was transferred to DBLC.
Property, plant and equipment escalated by 25.7% or P5,392 million mainly due to acquired assets relating to Bodegas Garvey in Spain and Domecq in Mexico. Also, a second distillery is being constructed in Batangas (which started operations mid-March 2018) and a glass furnace in Laguna had undergone rehabilitation (it started operations in second half of 2017).
Intangible assets rose 15.9% or P4,103 million from the trademarks which were part of the assets acquired relating to Bodegas Garvey in Spain and Domecq in Spain and Mexico. These trademarks included the Mexican brandies Don Pedro, Presidente and Azteca de Oro.
Other non-current assets shrank 35.7% or P454 million with the completion of purchases with deposits at last yearend.
The current interest-bearing loans rose 55.6% or P1,486 million due to additional drawdown from a revolving facility used for the purchase of stocks and capital expenditures in the Scotch Whisky segment and currently maturing portions of long-term bank loans. The non-current interest-bearing loans jumped 34.2% or P7,336 million from new loans incurred in Spain to finance the acquisitions of Bodegas Garvey and Domecq assets. The restructuring at BLC in transferring the Domecq assets included the related loans as well.
Trade and other payables went up 41.0% or P3,514 million, mainly from trade payables and accruals incurred by CBSP and DBLC which were new subsidiaries consolidated this year.
Income tax payable decreased 7.3% or P47 million primarily from lower unpaid taxes by the Group at current year-end.
Accrued interest payable at end-2016 pertained to the fixed interest accrued on the equity-linked debt securities which was settled during the year after the parties agreed to apply the accruing interest as consideration for the holder’s acquisition of EMP common shares in 2017. The fixed interest provision was amended to 0% in 2017.

Provisions refer to the amount provided by WMG for leased properties located in Scotland. Provisions went down by 7.8% or P37 million due to dilapidation payments for the head office which is now vacated.
Deferred tax liabilities are attributed to the UK group. These are net of deferred tax assets of EDI and AWGI.
Retirement benefit obligations decelerated 88.4% or P885 million, driven by the increase in the fair value of plan assets.
Accumulated translation adjustments refer to the difference resulting in the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ financial statements to Philippine pesos. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the closing rate and income and expenses at average exchange rates. The accumulated balance of the account is reflective of the depreciation in the value of Philippine peso and/or foreign currencies.
Treasury shares pertain to the acquisition cost of the shares that have been brought back from the market pursuant to the Company’s ongoing buyback program.
Conversion options represent the equity component of the equity-linked securities.
Share options pertain to the options granted to qualified employees of the Group pursuant to an approved employee share option plan. The increment of 86.9% or P27 million was a result of recognition of additional share options for the year with a corresponding debit to Investments in EDI account.
Revaluation reserves jumped 99.0% or P624 million due to actuarial gain on retirement benefit obligations booked by WMG.
Non-controlling interest pertains to the minority interest in DBLC, a newly-incorporated subsidiary consolidated by end-2017. A small portion refers to the redeemable, non-reissuable, non-participating preferred shares of AWGI issued to Arran in 2015.

Total assets amounted to P94,302 million as of December 31, 2016 which is 4.0% down from P98,259 million as of December 31, 2015. The Group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 3.55 times by the end of the current year.
Cash and cash equivalents dipped by 65.1% or P19,004 million in 2016 with the completion of the Bodegas Fundador acquisition, Tradewind acquisition, the debt repayments, and dividend payment. The Group ended 2016 with P10,174 million in its coffers from P29, 178 million at beginning of year.
Trade and other receivables fell by 20.7% or P2,813 million, primarily due to higher collections from customers and related parties.
Inventories increased 29.0% or P4,665 million, primarily from the maturing inventories of newly- acquired Bodegas Fundador and additions in WMG. WMG is currently laying down stocks for future growth.
Prepayments and other current assets soared 76.3% or P252 million due to timing of prepayments and subsequent charging to profit or loss of insurance, advertising, product cost, and overheads.
Investment in a joint venture increased primarily from the share in net profits of BLC for 2016.
Property, plant and equipment were up by 46.8% or P6,682 million primarily from the acquired assets of Bodegas Fundador and Tradewind.
Intangible assets rose by 45.2% or P8,023 million from the four acquired trademarks (Fundador, Terry Centenario, Harveys and Tres Cepas) and goodwill in the acquisition of Bodegas Fundador business.


Other non-current assets shrank 59.7% or P1,884 million with the completion of the Bodegas Fundador acquisition. The P2,850 million deposit paid last year for this acquisition was applied and closed upon completion in February 2016. The end-2016 balance included deposit for the Mexican brandy assets and acquired mortgage receivable on a leased bottling plant, which will decrease as rentals are billed.
Trade and other payables were reduced by 43.5% or P6,604 million as trade liabilities and advances from related parties were settled during the year.
Financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss result from lower market values of foreign exchange contracts by the end of 2016.
Income tax payable increased by 53.3% or P225 million, due to higher taxes at end of year.
The non-current interest-bearing loan refers to the €370 million short-term loan in 2015 which was refinanced into a five-year term loan in 2016, and the P2,000 million five-year bank loan obtained for the completion of construction and related equipment of the Balayan distillery plant. The current interest bearing loans at end-2016 represent outstanding amounts of drawdown in a three-year revolving credit facility which was set up in 2016. All the other short-term loans in 2015 had been settled in 2016.
Accrued interest payable grew 98.5% or P279 million from interest accrued on the equity-linked debt securities issued to Arran. This accrued interest is not yet due and will be payable at the time of instrument conversion or maturity.
Provisions refer to the amount provided by WMG for leased properties located in Scotland. Provisions for onerous lease and dilapidations went down by 39.5% or P314 million due to dilapidation payments for the old head office now vacated and onerous lease provisions on spaces that now have new tenants.
Deferred tax liabilities are attributed to the UK group. These are net of deferred tax assets of EDI and AWGI.
Retirement benefit obligations escalated by 115.6% or P537 million from the additions booked by WMG.
Accumulated translation adjustments refer to the resulting difference in the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’s financial statements to Philippine pesos. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the closing rate and income and expenses at average exchange rates. The accumulated balance of the account is reflective of the depreciation in the value of Philippine peso and/or foreign currencies.
Revaluation reserves were reduced substantially by P671 million due to actuarial loss on retirement benefit obligations booked by WMG.
Non-controlling interest refers to the redeemable, non-reissuable, non-participating preferred shares of AWGI issued to Arran in 2015.

The Group sourced funds from operations and loans and borrowings. The Company expects to meet its working capital requirements for the e n s u i n g y e a r primarily from available funds at year- end plus cash flows from operations. It may also from time to time seek other sources of funding, if necessary, which may include debt or equity financings, depending on its financing needs and market conditions.

A new era unfolds for Emperador, an era that will usher new ideas, new products, new results. The acquisitions in Spain and Mexico strengthen the Group’s position as the world’s largest brandy company in the world; and these, together with the Scotch whisky and Spanish sherry, add to the long heritage and prestige of Emperador. Having set the groundworks, the Group is best positioned to capitalize on premiumization opportunities and on innovation with its high-quality aged inventory.

Except for what have been noted:
There were no other known material events subsequent to the end of the year that would have a material impact in the current year.
There are no other known trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the Group’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way. The Group does not have nor anticipate having any cash flow or liquidity problems. The Group is not in default or breach of any note, lease or other indebtedness or financing arrangement requiring it to make payments.
There are no other known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is currently considered material to the Group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation. There are no other material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
There are no other known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. There are also no known events that will cause material change in the relationship between costs and revenues.
There are no other significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations.
There were no other material issuances, repurchases or repayments of debt and equity securities.
The business has no seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition and results of operations of the Group.