The challenges brought about by the COVID-19 pandemic that started in March 2020 has had significant impact on global economy as pandemic restrictions weaken economic conditions in many markets. The Group has navigated through these challenges by managing its costs and expenditures; maintaining supply of its products and capitalizing on off-premise and online sales channels while on- premise and Travel Retail were closed or limited due to lockdowns, travel restrictions and liquor bans.
Overall, despite the unprecedented conditions, our business has remained resilient as our operating results in 2020 and 2021 have shown.

The Group is presented into two segments: Scotch Whisky (representing the UK operations) and Brandy (representing the Philippine and` Spanish operations, including the Fundador and Domecq operations starting March 2016 and September 2017, respectively). BLC is a joint venture which is accounted for under the equity method and reported under the Brandy Segment.

Both segments showed sturdy results with Scotch Whisky segment gaining traction as it took up 1/3 of the revenue pie for the year 2021.

The Group performed better in 2021 amidst a still volatile environment4, anchored on the strength of
its diversified portfolio and international operations.
Net profit for the year surged 26% year-on-year to a record-high of P10.1 billion, as revenues and other income jumped 6% year-on-year to P55.9 billion. Net profit to owners accelerated to P10.0 billion, up 25% year-on-year. Gross profit rate (“GPR”) improved to 36% from 31% a year ago, and net profit rate (“NPR”) and net profit to owners rate (“NPOR”) higher at 18% this year as compared to 15% a year ago. Normalized net profit [i.e. P0.7 billion non-cash consolidation tax adjustment in 2021 added back] soared 35% to P10.8 billion, of which P 10.6 billion was attributable to owners, up 34% year-on-year.
The Brandy segment realized net profit of P7.6 billion during the year, up 31% year-on-year, as it turned over P37.2 billion revenues and other income from external customers, up 1% year-on-year. Brandy sales grew year-on-year at both the Philippine and international markets, particularly in Mexico, Spain and USA where restriction on on-trade business have loosened up. ‘Emperador’, ‘Fundador’, ‘Presidente’, and ‘Terry’ remained as the top-selling brandy brands, with sales increases registered during the year. Sales of ‘Harveys Bristol Cream’ also rose as it sold well in UK. Gross profit expanded 24% year-on-year to P12.6 billion with GPR improving to 34% from 28% of a year ago as more of high-margin products were sold in the current year. The higher GP and lower operating costs lifted both NP and NPO to P7.6 billion and P7.4 billion, respectively, with NPR and NPOR of 20% in the current year as compared to 15% a year ago.
The Scotch Whisky segment ended the year with P18.7 billion revenues and other income from external customers, a 17% jump year-on-year, with net profit [also its net profit to owners] growing at 14% year-on-year to P2.6 billion. Adding back a non-cash deferred tax expense, normalized net profit amounted to P3.2 billion which is up 44% from a year ago, buoyed by its single malt products. Single malts ‘Dalmore’, ‘Jura’, ‘Tamnavulin’ and ‘Fettercairn’ continued to post double-digit year-on-year growths in net net sales. There were large increases in Asia, UK, Europe, USA, Travel Retail, and practically all regions as economies began to bounce back against the pandemic although some countries were re-imposing restrictions in response to new COVID variants. UK off-trade and e- commerce continued to grow as demands remained high. Gross profit expanded 28% year-on-year to P7.4 billion with GPR improving to 40% from 36% last year as sales grew faster than cost of goods sold due mainly to product sales mix (sales of high-priced/ high-margin products increased). As markets opened up and sales grew, operating expenses increased. The segment ended with NPR of 14% and normalized NPR of 17% as compared to 14% of last year.

Total revenues and other income grew 6% (+P3.1 billion) year-on-year to P55.9 billion in 2021 as compared to P52.8 billion in 2020 as external revenues from Scotch Whisky segment and from Brandy segment grew by 17% (+P2.8 billion) and 1% (+P0.3 billion), respectively. ‘Emperador’,‘Fundador’ and ‘El Presidente’ remained to be the Group’s top selling Philippine, Spanish and Mexican brands, respectively while single malts ‘The Dalmore’, ‘Jura’ and ‘Tamnavulin’ were the Group’s top selling Scotch Whisky brands during the current year.

Other income dipped 24%(-P0.3 billion) to P1.1 billion from P1.4 billion a year ago due to lower share in net income of BLC, lower foreign exchange gains and lower interest income during the year.

Total costs and expenses remained stable at P43.0 billion this year from P43.4 billion a year ago, down 0.8% (-P0.4 billion) year-on-year, as Scotch Whisky business’ costs and expenses, including intersegment purchases, expanded 11% (+P1.4 billion) and those of Brandy business contracted 6% (-P1.8 billion).

Costs slid 2% (-P0.6 billion), to P34.8 billion from P35.4 billion a year ago due to product sales mix (sale of high-priced/high-margin products).

Gross profit rates on consolidated level improved to 36% in 2021 as compared to 31% in 2020. This is largely attributed to sales growth (+7%) outpacing cost of goods sold (-2%), which is further attributed to sales product mix. The GPRs of the Brandy and Scotch Whisky segments were respectively posted at 34% and 40% in 2021 as compared to 28% and 36% in 2020.

Other operating expenses shrank 4% (-P0.3 billion) to P7.0 billion from P7.4 billion because of optimized spending in the current lockdown situation and travel restrictions, especially in the Philippines. Advertising and promotions (-P0.1 billion), freight and handling (-P0.1 billion), and other services (-P0.1 billion) were down year-on-year. Salaries and employee benefits, on the other hand, went up (+P0.1 billion) year-on-year due to increased business activity from a year ago.
Selling and distribution expenses decreased 8% (-P0.4 billion) from a year ago. Brandy segment optimized its expenditures reflective of the current situation, and had spent 23% less (-P0.8 billion) year-on-year, particularly on Emperador’s advertising and promotions, freight and handling, representation and merchandising service fees. On the other hand, Scotch Whisky segment had resumed its expenditures and spent 18% more (+P0.4 billion), particularly on strategic and promotional marketing and freight and handling in the light of its growing sales.
General and administrative expenses increased 5% (+P0.1 billion) from a year ago. Brandy segment’s expenses remained stable while Scotch Whisky segment’s expenses grew on its salaries and employee benefits from a year ago.

Interest and other charges increased 89% (+P0.6 billion) to P1.2 billion from P0.6 billion due to higher interest expense and unrealized foreign exchange losses. Interest expense increased 43% (+P0.2billion) due to higher variable interest on ELS (due to 3 dividend declarations) during the year while Other charges increased 5times (+P0.3 billion) from unrealized foreign exchange losses.

As a result of the foregoing, profit before tax improved 37% to P12.9 billion from P9.4 billion a year ago.

Tax expense went up 96% (+P1.3 billion) to P2.7 billion from P1.4 billion a year ago due to higher taxable income attributed to robust sales and the take-up of P0.7 billion deferred tax adjustment on intangible assets at consolidation level, which was triggered by the increase in corporation tax in UK (effective April 1, 2023)(that received Royal Assent in June 2021). The said tax adjustment is a non- cash item, does not affect UK stand-alone operating results and will never be paid in the far future unless the UK business is sold or liquidated.

As a result of the foregoing, net profit soared 26% (+P2.1 billion) to P10.1 billion from P8.0 billion from a year ago. Net profit to owners jumped 25% to P10.0 billion from P8.0 billion last year. Excluding non-cash deferred tax expense, normalized net profit leaped 35% to P10.8 billion and normalized net profit to owners jumped 34% to P10.6 billion.

EBITDA, which is computed as profit before interest expense, tax, depreciation and amortization, went up 32% (+P3.7 billion) to P15.2 billion from P11.6 billion a year ago, showing respective margins of 27% and 22%.

Total assets amounted to P128.5 billion as at December 31, 2021, up 5% (+P6.1 billion) from P122.5 billion as at December 31, 2020. The Group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 2.8 times by the end of the current year.
Cash and cash equivalents increased 23% (+P1.8 billion) mainly from higher net cash from operating activities than net cash used in financing and investing activities, driven by the increase in net profit and in trade and other payables.
Trade and other receivables decreased 8% (-P1.7 billion) due to collection from trade customers (- P1.0B) and collection of advances to related parties (-P2.2 billion) while advances to suppliers accelerated due to increased production inventory requirements (+P1.1 billion).
Financial assets at fair value through profit or loss of P0.05 billion at the beginning of the year slipped 94% due to mark-to market valuation of the marketable securities held for trading to P0.003 billion by the end of the year.
Inventories expanded 10% (+P3.1 billion) primarily from the continuous laying of Scotch whisky liquids for ageing (under work-in-process) and advanced production to ensure continuity of dispatch.
Prepayments and other current assets fell 9% (-P0.1 billion) due mostly to timing of prepayments for overhead and general expenses (-P0.3 billion), taxes (+P0.1 billion) and deferred input vat (+P0.1billion) at the end of 2021.
Investment in a joint venture increased 6% (+P0.2 billion) from share in net income of BLC and translation adjustment during the year.
Deferred tax assets decreased 8% (-P0.01 billion) due to movements of timing differences.
Property, plant and equipment went up 5% (+P1.4 billion) brought about by land acquisitions (+P0.6 billion) which were reclassified from Advances to suppliers during the year (see Note 23.10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements) and capital expenditures mainly for buildings (+P0.7 billion) and machinery and equipment (+P0.3 billion). Capital expenditures were regularly made to expand operations and efficiency as well as upgrade and improve manufacturing facilities and equipment.

Other non-current assets went down 40% (-P0.5 billion) due to reclassification of Advances to suppliers to Land account (-P0.6 billion) as transfers of ownership title were finalized during the year, offset by the increase in rental deposits (+P0.04 billion).
Retirement benefit assets (obligations) made an upswing 354% (+P1.3 billion) to P0.9 billion from P0.4 billion liability at the beginning of the year, as fair value of retirement plan assets exceeds the present value of the obligation.
Current Interest-bearing loans went down 36% (-P1.9 billion) and the non-current portion by 15% (- P3. 7 billion), for combined decrease of P5.5 billion, from net repayment of bank loans.
Trade and other payables increased 17% (+P2.6 billion), mainly due to timing of purchases for production (+P2.3 billion).
Equity-linked debt securities amounting to P3.4 billion was derecognized and presented as Deposit on Future Stock Subscription since the Holder exercised its right to Tranche 2 conversion.
Lease liabilities were accounts brought about by the adoption of PFRS 16-Leases beginning January 1, 2019. The current and non-current portions amounted to P0.2 billion and P0.9 billion, respectively, at end of 2021, up 18% (+P0.03 billion) and down 31% (-P0.4 billion), respectively, due to payments and reclassifications of current portion during the year. [See Notes 9.3 and 2.16(a) to the Consolidated Financial Statements]
Income tax payable escalated 23% (+P0.4 billion) primarily from higher income taxes by the Group at current year-end which is further attributed to higher taxable profit.
Provisions refer to the amounts provided by WMG for leased properties located in Scotland. Provisions went up 81% (+P0.2 billion) mainly due to increase in dilapidations provision coming from contingent liability. [See Notes 17, 2.14 and 3.2(k) to the Consolidated Financial Statements]
Deferred tax liabilities increased 54% (P1.2 billion) due to movements of timing differences, largely from retirement benefit, brand valuation and fair value adjustments in UK.
Equity attributable to owners of the parent company increased by 17% (+P11.1 billion) mainly from net profit (+P10.0 billion) realized during the year as reduced by dividends declared (-P5.1 billion) and net treasury shares acquired (-P1.0 billion) during the year as well as translation gains (+P2.9 billion) and the recognition of the equity component of the equity-linked securities presented under Deposit on Future Stock Subscription (+P3.4 billion). The Group was given a period until May 15, 2022 to issue the Tranche 2 shares.
Accumulated translation adjustments refer to the difference resulting in the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ financial statements to Philippine pesos. Monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the closing rate and income and expenses at average exchange rates. The accumulated balance of the account is reflective of the depreciation in the value of Philippine peso and/or foreign currencies.
Treasury shares pertain to the acquisition cost of the shares that have been brought back from the market pursuant to the Company’s buyback program. The account also included shares held by a subsidiary.
Share options pertain to the options granted to qualified employees of the Group pursuant to an approved employee share option plan. The increment of 32% (+P45 million) was a result of recognition of additional share options expense during the year both from existing and additional employees granted under the employee share option plan during the year.
Revaluation reserves gained P0.8 billion due to actuarial gain on retirement benefit obligations booked by WMG.
Other reserves include legal reserves that represent the statutory requirements in Luxembourg which comprise of net wealth tax reserve and capital reserve at year-end.

Non-controlling interest increased 28% (+P0.2 billion) mainly from net profit share (+P0.2 billion) realized by minority owners in DBLC, a foreign subsidiary consolidated by end-2017 and in Boozy, a local company consolidated starting in 2018.

The Group sourced funds principally from operations and loans and borrowings. The Company expects to meet its working capital requirements for the ensuing year primarily from available funds at year-end plus cash flows from operations. It may also from time to time seek other sources of funding, if necessary, which may include debt or equity financings, depending on its financing needs and market conditions.

The Group’s renowned brandy and whisky products sold all over the world are the catalyst for continued growth and put the Group in best position, with its high-quality aged inventory, for premiumization and innovation opportunities, as well as to adapt to trends and consumer appetite.


Except for what have been noted:
There were no other known material events subsequent to the end of the year that would have a material impact in the current year being reported.
There are no other known trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the Group’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way. The Group does not have nor anticipate having any cash flow or liquidity problems. The Group is not in default or breach of any note, lease or other indebtedness or financing arrangement requiring it to make payments.
There are no other known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is currently considered material to the Group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation. There are no other material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
There are no other known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. There are also no known events that will cause material change in the relationship between costs and revenues.
There are no other significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations.
There were no other material issuances, repurchases or repayments of debt and equity securities.
The business has no seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition and results of operations of the Group.