For 2020, sales and margin improvements in the second half reduced overall decline with the Group’s consolidated sales and operating income reaching P725,797 million and P71,476 million, 29% and 38% lower from the previous year, respectively. The decline in revenue was mainly caused by lower sales volume of Petron Corporation (Petron) and the Beer and Non- Alcoholic Beverages (NAB) division under the Food and Beverage business. This was due to lockdown and strict quarantine restrictions implemented by the government in the early part of the year coupled with lower selling price per liter of Petron as a result of the volatility of global crude oil prices. Sales of the Energy business also declined due to the deferment of the power supply agreements with Manila Electric Company (Meralco) and lower contract rates under the new power supply agreements that took effect on December 26, 2019 compared to the previous agreements. The Infrastructure business likewise registered a decline in sales which was mainly brought about by the decline in average daily traffic volume in all the operating toll roads which have been weighed down by the different levels of travel restrictions during the year.
Cost of sales was lower by 30% to P576,449 million mainly due to the: (a) decrease in sales volume and lower cost per liter of Petron, (b) lower power purchases, decline in net generation cost due to lower average cost of coal and natural gas prices, and lower energy fees due to the decline in net generation of the Sual, Ilijan and San Roque Power Plants, and (c) lower sales volume from Beer and NAB and Food divisions, under the Food and Beverage business. This was partly offset by the increase in sales volume of the Spirits division.
The decrease in selling and administrative expenses by 9% to P77,872 million was mainly due to lower advertising and promotion, and freight, trucking and handling expenses primarily from the Beer and NAB and Food divisions, under the Food and Beverage business, and reduction in outsourced services of Petron due to the pandemic. Advertising campaigns and promotions were suspended and reduced, respectively, due to COVID-19 restrictions while the decline in freight, trucking and handling was brought about by lower sales volume.
The decrease in interest expense and other financing charges was mainly due to the: (a) lower average interest rate of Petron and (b) lower interest expense of the Energy business from the declining principal balance of its finance lease liabilities.
The decrease in interest income was primarily due to lower interest rates and average balance of cash and cash equivalents.
The increase in equity in net earnings was mainly due to the higher share in net income of Manila North Harbour Port, Inc. (MNHPI).
The higher loss on sale of property and equipment pertains to the retirement of the fixed assets of San Miguel Yamamura Packaging Corporation (SMYPC) Manila Plastics Plant which were damaged by the fire incident in Pandacan, Manila in February 2020.
The increase in other income - net was mainly due to the: (a) settlement received by the Energy business from third party contractors on account of damages arising from the latter’s nonfulfillment of obligations under procurement-related contracts and (b) income recognized by SMC from the Tax Credit Certificates (TCC) issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR) in relation to the claims for refund filed for overpayment of excise taxes with the BIR for San Mig Light.
The lower income tax expense was primarily due to the: (a) tax benefit by Petron from the loss before tax in 2020 compared to tax expense on the income before tax last year, (b) lower taxable income of the Beer and NAB division under the Food and Beverage business and Infrastructure business, and (c) derecognition by SMC of deferred income tax asset on the Net Operating Loss Carry-Over (NOLCO) which expired in 2019.
Consolidated net income for the full year of 2020 amounted to P21,879 million, 55% lower than the same period in the previous year. Consolidated net income in the second half amounted to P25,867 million, 15% higher than same period last year, reversing the first half net loss of P3,988 million, which was due largely to the economy’s contraction and quarantine restrictions. The improvement of the performance in the second half was mainly brought about by the sustained performance recoveries from all major businesses, combined with effective cost saving initiatives implemented throughout the Group.
The share of non-controlling interests on the Group's net income decreased in 2020 mainly due to the net loss of Petron in 2020 as compared to a net income in 2019 and lower net income of the Beer and NAB division under the Food and Beverage business and Atlantic Aurum Investments B.V. The decrease was offset by higher amount of distribution on SMC Global Power Holdings Corp.’s (SMC Global) Undated Subordinated Capital Securities (USCS) and Senior Perpetual Capital Securities (SPCS).

San Miguel Food and Beverage, Inc. (SMFB) registered consolidated sales of P279,290 million for the full year, 10% lower than in 2019. Its strong rebound in the second half narrowed its 19% decline in the first half, as a result of continuous volume improvements from its Beer and NAB division, the all-time high performance of its Spirits division, and steady growth of the Prepared and Packaged Food segment of the Food division. This was, however, slightly tempered by lower volumes from the Food division’s Protein and Animal Nutrition and Health segments.
SMFB’s consolidated operating income ended at P33,412 million, a 30% decline, while net income closed at P22,401 million, down 31% from last year.

San Miguel Brewery Inc. (SMB) recorded consolidated sales of P107,928 million in 2020, 24% lower than in 2019. The decline was a direct effect of the Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) restrictions throughout the country, as well as its regional markets. SMB saw significant sales recovery in the second half of the year, posting a 52% sales improvement over the first half, delivering volumes of 202 million cases.
Operating income amounted to P24,467 million, down 37%, and net income stood at P17,455 million.

Domestic operations recorded robust volume growth in the first two months of the year, but quarantine lockdowns resulted to the closure of all on- and off- premise outlets, limited transport activities, and the banning of the sale of liquor products in many markets. All these took a toll on beer sales, particularly in the second quarter.
The easing of restrictions paved the way for the gradual, partial re-opening of the economy. As a result, performance began to pick-up in mid-May, with significant volume recovery in June, and sustained month-on-month sales improvements until year- end. Sales for the year amounted to P97,828 million, buoyed by the price increase implemented on March 1, 2020, but remained 24% lower versus 2019. Combined with cost containment efforts, operating income ended at P23,259 million.
SMB boosted its presence in digital, e-premise, and other appropriate channels for sustained brand equity. It also tapped opportunities for selling especially in emerging and relevant channels, to mitigate the impact of the pandemic and adapt to the new normal. SMB also put in place programs to further support the shift from on-premise to home consumption. Effective cost management, rationalized spending, tighter business controls, and other cost saving initiatives were also implemented, helping sustain the domestic operations’ positive profit level.

To support recovery, SMB strengthened its marketing campaigns with TV and radio placements namely, the “Inom Sweet Home 5+1” promo and “Pass the Bottle” with the San Miguel Beermen. Digital brand campaigns were also rolled out to supplement traditional media. For the first time, the yearly SMB Oktoberfest event was held virtually over Facebook.

International operations were also affected by the pandemic, as governments in countries where there are operations implemented their own containment measures. This resulted to the temporary closure of manufacturing plants, as well as the closure of on-premise outlets, which resulted to a decline in consumption. The operations in Indonesia and Thailand were particularly affected, as on-premise consumption in these markets are relatively high.
Meanwhile, the Hong Kong, South China, and Vietnam markets were less affected, as evidenced by significantly improved profits compared to the previous year. The Exports business also recorded consistent improvements, brought about by the continuous growth of off-trade channels and brand focused distribution.
SMB International continues to implement its marketing programs, volume incentive initiatives, and market penetration and distribution activities, to sustain and improve volumes and profitability.

Ginebra San Miguel Inc. (GSMI) started 2020 with healthy volume growth in the first two months of the year. Volumes shrank during the ECQ, but quickly recovered after. Trade replenishments boosted sales, leading to June volumes reaching the highest monthly levels on record.
Coming from a volume decline in the first half, GSMI’s sustained, strong month-on- month volume rebound resulted to full-year volumes of 38.6 million cases, up 8% from 2019. This is attributable to the expansion of distribution reach, continued efforts to maintain brand relevance, prompt replenishment of stocks in outlets, utilization of e- commerce channels via the San Miguel online store “The Mall”, and promotion through the online Ginumanfest live concert.
In July, GSMI resumed its “Lakas sa Magandang Bukas” and “I Choose Mojito” marketing campaigns on radio and television, as the economy reopened.
GSMI launched a new thematic campaign in September, “One Ginebra Nation 2.0”, sending out a message of hope, resiliency and unity, attuned to the call of this ongoing challenges which further helped bump up volumes. This was supported by localized consumer promos and the expansion of distribution coverage. Another campaign, “GSM Blue I Choose Mojito 2.0”, also contributed to volume increase.
Consolidated sales for the full year reached P36,202 million, up 25% from the previous year’s P29,063 million.
With better operational efficiencies and effective alcohol sourcing, operating income amounted to P3,806 million, up 32% versus 2019. Net income hit P2,757 million, 65% higher from 2019 - the highest ever recorded by GSMI.

The Food division’s consolidated sales declined by 3% to P135,170 million, from the previous year, reflecting the full impact of ECQ in its basic food segments which was partly moderated by the solid performance of the Prepared and Packaged Food segment as packaged food became an essential item in consumers’ grocery baskets as they settled into their home-based- work-from-home and online classes lifestyle.
Sales in the first three quarters followed a downward trend but slowly returned to growth as quarantine restrictions were eased in September. While institutional sales remained weak due to limited dine-in activities of food service, incremental sales from alternative trade channels partly offset this and the usual demand surge from Christmas spending boosted revenues in the fourth quarter.
Operating income dropped by 17% to P5,185 million in 2020 primarily due to the impact of the pandemic on revenues and operating expenses.
The Protein segment, consisting of the Magnolia Chicken and Monterey Meats businesses, was most affected by the pandemic as revenues declined by 10%. Many of the foodservice customers, including fast food chains and “lechon manok” outlets, were forced to close shop during the ECQ. This resulted in a massive build- up of frozen chicken inventory in the second quarter, which pushed down prices. In response, aggressive move-out plans were implemented, such as developing alternative trade channels, notably community resellers, to push volumes and help bring down inventory. Poultry volumes in the fourth quarter posted double-digit growth quarter-on-quarter, buoyed by a moderate uptick during the holiday season and incremental sales from alternative channels, particularly community resellers which accounted for 11% of total volumes in 2020. From 192 community resellers in March, it expanded to over 13,000 by end-December and this is still expanding. Chicken prices likewise improved since October and reached around P125/kilo in December. Meanwhile, the Monterey Meats business experienced lower revenues brought about by the restrictions on the movement of pork imposed by some local governments to combat African Swine Fever.
Animal Nutrition and Health segment revenues registered a slight decrease of 2% due to the continuing effects of the African Swine Fever which affected hog feeds sales. Proving to be a reliable supplier during the ECQ and able to implement more competitive selling prices has allowed the business to grab market share. Volumes ended slightly higher than the previous year, registering robust growth in free range fowl, duck and aquatic feeds, as customers opted for superior product quality produced in the new feed mills.
Prepared and Packaged Food segment, composed of the processed meats, dairy, spreads, ice cream, biscuits and coffee businesses, posted 10% revenue growth as restricted living led to more in-home cooking and consumption. This pushed demand for breakfast items and benefitted the premium processed meats, margarine, cheese, and pancake mixes which all registered double-digit growth rates. Our flagship product, Purefoods Tender Juicy Hotdog, saw volumes grow across all retail channels with our chicken variant - Tender Juicy Chicken Hotdog - registering the highest growth at 98% during the pandemic. Purefoods Hams and Magnolia Cheeseballs performed strongly in December as special Christmas bundles were created so that more families could celebrate despite tight budgets.
Changes in consumer behavior and increased demand for in-home food driven by lockdown restrictions, gave us opportunity to push our new products such as our 
ready-to-cook Magnolia Fried Chicken, our newly-launched plant-based food products under the Veega brand, the Purefoods seafood line, and the Purefoods Heat and Eat slow-cooked viands. New product launches also included ready-to-eat viands under the Cook Express and Chef’s Selections brands targeted at foodservice outlets and home-based businesses.
Revenues of the Flour segment were down by 2% mainly from a slowdown in volumes from institutional customers as well as lower selling prices. Price rollbacks were made for hard flour due to aggressive competition in the industry. However, the retail sector continued to grow on the strength of increased demand for our Bake Best flour premixes and baking ingredients arising from heightened consumer interest in home baking.

The Packaging business registered P31,504 million in sales for 2020, down 17% from the previous year, similarly reflecting the effects of the ECQ. Volumes were dragged down by lower orders from its major beverage customers. This was partly offset by increased deliveries to healthcare and pharmaceutical customers, growth in sales from the food and liquor sectors, mainly for home consumption due to the gradual re-opening of the economy and improvements in the export market. On the other hand, the performance of Australia, Malaysia, and China operations remained stable.
With effective cost management initiatives, the Packaging business generated operating income of P961 million.

SMC Global registered full year sales of P115,029 million, 15% lower versus 2019, as off- take volumes of 26,116 gigawatt hours (GWh) declined by 7%. This was primarily due to the deferment of commencement of the 290 megawatts (MW) mid-merit power supply agreement with Meralco, where the provisional approval of the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) was posted and distributed to the parties only on March 16, 2020 and the deferment of the 260 MW extended contract with Masinloc, which remains pending ERC approval to-date.
In addition, the new Meralco baseload power supply agreements that took effect on December 26, 2019 have lower contract rates compared to the previous power supply agreements.
Sales volumes were affected by a decline in demand from industrial and contestable customers during the lockdown period, which gradually improved with the reopening of economic activities after the easing of the ECQ restrictions. This was, however, mitigated by improved utility demand as household consumption increased.
With lower fuel costs and spot purchases and effective implementation of power dispatch strategies, operating income ended 3% higher at P36,923 million. Net income, on the other hand, amounted to P18,874 million, 31% higher than last year.
SMC Global also increased its total capacity during the year. On September 26, 2020, it officially started commercial operations of its Masinloc Unit 3, with 335 MW capacity. On December 15, 2020, it achieved substantial completion, which included the testing and commissioning by the National Grid Corporation of the Philippines, of its 20 MWh Battery Energy Storage (BESS) facility in Kabankalan, Negros Occidental.
With this, SMC Global’s total capacity reached 4,697 MW as of December 31, 2020, accounting for 20% of the National Grid, 27% of the Luzon Grid, and 8% of the Mindanao Grid.
It has also started to undertake the expansion of its portfolio of BESS projects that will provide an additional 1,000 MWh. The initial 490 MWh across 15 sites are in advanced stages of completion and are expected to start operating in early 2021. The remaining 510 MWh across other sites are expected to be completed by the early part of 2022.

Petron face significant challenges throughout the year. Global oil prices, which had already been volatile, plunged in March as a price war broke among the top oil producing countries. Dubai crude collapsed by around 33%, from an average of $63.5 per barrel in 2019 to $42 per barrel in 2020, resulting to successive rollbacks in pump prices.
Oil prices fell to as low as US$13/bbl in daily trading, reaching record low levels in 26 years. Refining margins also remained weak in the region as oil consumption declined. Demand for fuel also fell as transportation and mobility were severely restricted throughout the ECQ period.
Petron posted successive recoveries in the last two quarters of the year, resulting in net profit of P2,823 million in the second half, as world crude prices stabilized and rallied towards year-end, bringing subsequent inventory gains. Consolidated volumes also improved, from the second quarter slump. Still, these were not enough to compensate for losses incurred in the first half, which resulted from demand contraction in both domestic and international markets, poor refining margins, and the collapse in world oil prices.
As a result, Petron’s consolidated sales amounted to P286,033 million, down 44% from the previous year. Volumes were likewise down 27% to 78.6 million barrels. Petron recorded consolidated operating loss of P4,629 million and net loss of P11,413 million in 2020.
Petron continues to implement measure to maximize productivity and reduce expenses in order to cope with the pandemic’s impacts. Cash preservation initiatives are in place, as Petron continues to find new ways to adapt, given that the economy’s recovery may take longer than initially expected.

The Infrastructure business recorded a 33% volume drop for 2020, reflecting the effect of travel restrictions throughout Luzon. Despite this, the business continued to waive toll fees to help to medical front liners. Following the easing of restrictions, a significant recovery in traffic volumes was seen, with some operating toll roads registering daily traffic at almost pre-pandemic levels.
Combined average vehicle daily traffic in the fourth quarter reached 80% of 2019 levels, with notable recoveries from the South Luzon Expressway (SLEX) and Star Tollway.
As a result, full year sales amounted to P14,565 million, 38% lower than the previous year, while operating income ended 78% lower at P2,571 million.
The Infrastructure business, nevertheless, delivered on its commitments and completed two major projects. The entire stretch of the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway (TPLEX) from Tarlac up to Rosario, La Union was completed and opened to the public. The construction of the Skyway Stage 3 project, linking SLEX and North Luzon Expressway (NLEX) was also completed. Skyway Stage 3 was soft-opened December 29, 2020, and was inaugurated and opened to motorists on January 14, 2021.
The Metro Rail Transit (MRT 7) project is progressing well, with construction returning to normal levels. Work on sections from Quezon Memorial Circle to Quirino Highway traversing Commonwealth Avenue and Regalado Avenue is ongoing.
Construction of the SLEX Toll Road 4 (SLEX TR4) project, which will extend SLEX from Sto. Tomas, Batangas to Lucena City in Quezon province is ongoing along the Alaminos- Tiaong area. Coordination with the DPWH is also ongoing to expedite the acquisition of right-of-way.
Meanwhile, the Alabang South Skyway Extension project is in an advanced stage of completion. The construction on Skyway Stage 4 has also started at workable areas along C-5. Acquisition of right-of-way properties is ongoing. The Toll Regulatory Board has given the Group permission to proceed with detailed engineering design on realignments.
Stages 1 and 2 of the Bulacan Bulk Water Treatment facilities are now complete. Feasibility study of Stage 3 has also been completed, while work on the preliminary engineering design is ongoing.

On October 23 and December 20, 2019, the Plan of Merger and Articles of Merger, respectively, were executed by and between SMYPC and SMYAC, whereby the entire assets and liabilities of SMYAC was transferred to and absorbed by SMYPC, the surviving entity.
On February 24, 2020, the Philippine Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) approved the merger and the increase in the authorized capital stock of SMYPC. On the same date, the Certificate of Filing of the Articles and Plan of Merger were issued.
On March 1, 2020, the effective date of the merger, SMYPC issued 3,901,011 and 2,100,544 common shares to SMC and Nihon Yamamura Glass Co., Ltd. (NYG), respectively, for a total amount of P6,002 million as consideration for the net assets of SMYAC pursuant to the terms of the Plan of Merger. The shares were issued out of the increase in the authorized capital stock of SMYPC. With the completion of the merger, SMC and NYG retained their respective ownership in SMYPC of 65% and 35%, respectively.
On July 7, 2020, the application for a tax-free exchange certification/ruling on the merger was filed with the BIR and still pending as at March 11, 2021.

On June 12, 2020, the Board of Directors (BOD) and stockholders of NCC approved the amendment of the Articles of Incorporation of NCC relating to the reclassification of 194,000,000 common shares to Series "2" Preferred Shares, the option of the stockholders of the common shares to convert to Series “2” Preferred Shares and renaming the existing 3,000,000 preferred shares of NCC to Series “1” Preferred Shares. On August 6, 2020, the SEC approved the amendment of the Articles of Incorporation of NCC to reflect the amendments.
On August 24, 2020, the stockholders of NCC which collectively own 65% of the common shares, exercised the option to convert their common shares to a total of 194,000,000 Series “2” Preferred Shares. SMEII did not exercise its option to convert its common shares to Series “2” Preferred Shares. With the conversion of the common shares, SMEII gained control of NCC, exercising 100% of voting rights.
As a result, SMEII recognized the investment in NCC at fair market value and the net assets of NCC was consolidated to SMEII as at August 24, 2020. The fair valuation of the net assets and investment in NCC resulted to the recognition of a total gain of P1,657 million, included as part of “Other income (charges) - net” account, in the consolidated statements of income.

On various dates in 2020, AAIPC availed of a total of P11,000 million from the P41,200 million Corporate Notes Facility Agreement dated December 9, 2019 with various local banks. The proceeds of the loan are being used mainly to refinance existing debt obligations, invest and/or advance for infrastructure projects, for general corporate requirements and finance transaction related fees, taxes and expenses. The loan is payable in 40 quarterly installments up to December 14, 2029 and subject to fixed interest rate.

On various dates in April and May 2020, SMFI drew the remaining P8,000 million from the P18,000 million term loan facility for the purpose of refinancing its existing short- term loan obligations, to fund capital expansion projects and for other general corporate requirements. The loan is subject to a floating interest rate with a one-time option to convert to fixed rate. The loan is payable in ten years, in quarterly installments, which will commence in March 2023. The maturity date of the loan is on December 12, 2029.

On April 27, 2020, Petron availed of P5,000 million term loan which will be amortized quarterly for five years beginning July 27, 2021 and is subject to fixed interest rate. The maturity date of the loan is on April 27, 2025. The proceeds were used for general corporate purposes.

On August 26, 2020, Petron availed of US$150 million three-year long-term debt, subject to floating interest rate, that will mature on August 7, 2023. The proceeds were used to prepay part of US$1,000 million term loan facility and US$800 million loan.

On April 22, 2020, Petron availed of JPY15,000 million term loan, subject to floating interest rate. Repayment of principal will be made in seven equal semi- annual amortization beginning March 27, 2022. The maturity date of the loan is on March 27, 2025. The proceeds were used to prepay part of US$1,000 million term loan facility.

On March 31, 2020, MPPCL drew US$43 million from the US$525 million Omnibus Expansion Facility Agreement dated December 1, 2015 to finance the construction of the additional 335 MW (Unit 3 of Masinloc Power Plant) coal-fired power plant. The loan is divided into fixed interest tranche and floating interest tranche with maturities up to December 2030.

On March 19, 2020, SMC drew US$1,950 million from the remainder of the term loan facility amounting to US$2,000 million for general corporate purposes. The loan is subject to floating interest rate and will mature on September 27, 2024.

On February 21, 2020, the SEC issued to SMFB the Permit to Sell P15,000 million fixed- rate bonds, consisting of five-year Series A Bonds due in 2025 and seven-year Series B Bonds due in 2027.
SMFB was able to issue P8,000 million and P7,000 million of the Series A and B Bonds, respectively, and these were listed on the Philippine Dealing & Exchange Corp. (PDEx) on March 10, 2020.
The Series A and Series B Bonds have fixed interest rate equivalent to 5.050% per annum and 5.250% per annum, respectively.
The proceeds were used to redeem the outstanding perpetual Series “2” Preferred Shares on March 12, 2020 and payment of transaction-related fees, costs and expenses.

On May 25, 2020, SMC redeemed the P10,000 million two-year fixed-rate Peso- denominated notes issued on May 25, 2018.
The notes were redeemed from the proceeds of the US$1,950 million loan drawn in March 2020.

On October 29 and December 10, 2020, SMC issued and listed on the Philippine Stock Exchange (PSE) 266,666,667 SMC2J Preferred Shares (inclusive of the oversubscription of 133,333,267 shares) and 183,904,900 SMC2K Preferred Shares (inclusive of the oversubscription of 50,571,500 shares) under the 533,333,334 Series “2” Preferred Shares shelf subscription. The shares were issued at an offer price of P75.00 per share for a total amount of P33,793 million and with dividend rates of 4.75% (for SMC2J Preferred Shares) and 4.50% (for SMC2K Preferred Shares) per annum. The net proceeds from issuance of SMC2J Preferred Shares are being used for the Infrastructure projects, particularly the Manila International Airport and MRT 7, while the net proceeds from the issuance of SMC2K Preferred Shares will be used on investments in BOC and airport and airport related projects and for refinancing of existing obligations.

On various dates in June and July 2020, SMC issued a total of P14,810 million RPS at an issue price of 100%, with an initial rate of distribution of 5% per annum.
On September 29 and October 19, 2020, SMC purchased and cancelled a total of P10,810 million RPS, pursuant to the agreement with the holders of the said RPS who accepted the offer by SMC to purchase the RPS. As a result of the purchase, the RPS were cancelled in accordance with the terms and conditions of the purchase agreement between the parties.
The net proceeds were used for general corporate requirements.
The RPS are capital securities with no fixed redemption date. The security holders have the right to receive distribution payable quarterly in arrears. SMC has the right to defer this distribution under certain conditions.

On July 29, 2020, SMC issued US$500 million SPCS at an issue price of 100%, with an initial rate of distribution of 5.5% per annum. The securities were issued under SMC’s US$3,000 Million Medium Term Note and Securities Programme. The net proceeds are being used to finance investments and various projects, to refinance existing obligations, and for general corporate purposes.

On various dates in 2020, SMC Global issued and listed on the Singapore Exchange Securities Trading Limited (SGX-ST) SPCS for a total amount of US$1,350 million.

As approved by the BOD on March 12, 2020 and August 6, 2020, SMC redeemed on April 14, 2020 and September 21, 2020 all the outstanding 279,406,667 Series “1” Preferred Shares (SMCP1 Preferred Shares) and 89,333,400 Series “2-D” Preferred Shares (SMC2D Preferred Shares), respectively, at a redemption price of P75.00 per share, plus any accumulated unpaid cash dividends. SMC paid a total of P27,656 million to the holders of SMCP1 Preferred Shares and SMC2D Preferred Shares.
The shares redeemed were not considered retired and may be re-issued by SMC at a price to be determined by the BOD. The listing of the said shares is merely suspended until re-issued by SMC, upon the approval with the Philippine Stock Exchange of the application for lifting of trading suspension in accordance with the listing rules.

During the year, the Group paid P34,898 million of maturing obligations funded by cash generated from operations.
Petron, Infrastructure, Energy, SMC, Spirits division under Food and Beverage and other businesses paid a total of P15,555 million, P6,794 million, P6,262 million, P4,148 million, P882 million and P1,257 million, respectively, of their maturing long-term debt.

Consolidated total assets as at December 31, 2020 amounted to about P1,912,207 million, P94,473 million or 5% higher than December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to the higher balance of cash and cash equivalents, property, plant and equipment and other intangible assets, offset by the decrease in inventories and trade and other receivables.
The increase in cash and cash equivalents by P60,752 million was mainly due to the: (a) net proceeds from the issuance by SMC of US$1,950 million long-term corporate notes and preferred shares (SMC2J Preferred Shares and SMC2K Preferred Shares), and (b) issuance by SMC and SMC Global of US$500 million and US$1,350 million SPCS, respectively. The increase was reduced by the: (c) funding of the various capital expenditures of the Group, (d) payment of long-term debt and short-term loans of the Group, and (e) redemption of preferred shares (SMCP1 Preferred Shares and SMC2D Preferred Shares) by SMC.
The decrease in trade and other receivables by P12,119 million was mainly due to lower trade customer balances by Petron attributable to lower fuel prices and drop in sales volume.


The decrease in inventories by P24,641 million was attributable mainly to lower prices and volume of both crude and finished products of Petron Philippines and Petron Malaysia.
The decrease in total biological assets by P1,206 million was mainly due to the closure of some farms affected by the African Swine Fever.
The increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets by P8,025 million was primarily due to: (a) higher specific tax and product replenishment claims and unused creditable withholding taxes by Petron, (b) increase in input taxes by UPSI related to the importations of equipment for the BESS projects, and (c) receipt by SMC of TCC issued by the BIR in relation to the claims for refund filed for overpayment of excise taxes with the BIR for San Mig Light.
The increase in property, plant and equipment by P48,010 million was mainly due to the: (a) on- going projects of the Energy business, the Food division, and the Beer and NAB division, and (b) various fixed asset purchases by Petron.
The increase in investment property by P8,899 million was mainly due to the: (a) acquisition of land in Pandacan, Manila by SMHC, (b) acquisition of land for the Airport Project, and (c) various properties acquired by SMPI.
The increase in other intangible assets by P20,518 million was mainly due to the costs of various projects of the Infrastructure business, net of amortization during the year, and the mineral rights recognized upon consolidation of NCC.
The increase in deferred tax assets by P2,894 million was mainly due to the recognition of deferred tax on NOLCO by Petron and SMYPC.
The decrease in other noncurrent assets by P9,268 million was due to the: (a) application of advances to contractors on progress billings by Citra Central Expressway Corp. (CCEC) and Mariveles Power Generation Corporation (MPGC) for the Skyway Stage 3 Project and Mariveles Power Plant Project, respectively, (b) reclassification from noncurrent to current assets of subsidy receivable due for collection in 2021 by SMC TPLEX Corporation, (c) reclassification to debt issue cost of the loan facilitation fees and other filing and agency fees on loan facilities entered in 2019 by SMC, and (d) decrease in restricted cash balance of MPPCL.
The decrease in loans payable by P28,847 million was mainly due to the net payment of loans made by SMC and refinancing of short-term loans to long-term debt by the Food division under the Food and Beverage business and Packaging business.
The decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses by P22,788 million was mainly due to lower liabilities for crude and petroleum products primarily from the drop in prices as at end of 2020 versus 2019 and lower outstanding liabilities to contractors and vendors for services purchased by Petron, offset by the additional payables recognized for the construction of Mariveles Power Plant.
The increase in total long-term debt, net of debt issue costs, by P84,105 million was due mainly to the: (a) issuance of US$1,950 million corporate notes by SMC, (b) issuance of P15,000 million fixed-rate Peso-denominated bonds by SMFB, and (c) availment by the Group of long- term debt. The increase was offset by the payment of maturing obligations and translation adjustments on the foreign currency-denominated loans.
The increase in deferred tax liabilities by P2,484 million was due to the higher deferred tax liability recognized by the Energy business arising from the differences in actual PSALM payments over finance lease liability-related expenses, offset by the recognition of deferred tax on NOLCO for the year by Petron.

The decrease in lease liabilities, net of current portion, by P25,991 million was primarily due to the payments made to PSALM by the Energy business entities under the Independent Power Producer Administration (IPPA) Agreements.
The increase in other noncurrent liabilities P4,109 million was mainly due to the: (a) recognition by MPGC of retention payable related to the ongoing Mariveles Power Plant Project, (b) remeasurement by Petron of asset retirement obligation, and (c) increase in derivative liability of SMC due to fair valuation and foreign exchange translation.
The balance of capital securities in 2020 amounting to P28,171 million pertains to the US$500 million SPCS and P4,000 million RPS issued by SMC, net of documentary stamp taxes and other expenses directly related to the issuances.
The decrease in equity reserves by P4,259 million pertains mainly to the currency translation adjustments for the year resulting from the appreciation of Philippine Peso against the US Dollar.
The increase in appropriated retained earnings by P3,466 million was due to additional appropriation by: (a) SMB for the Series G Bond which will mature in 2021, (b) Citra Metro Manila Tollways Corporation for the Alabang South Skyway Extension Project, and (c) SMC Shipping and Lighterage Corporation for various expansion projects, offset by the reversals made by South Premiere Power Corporation (SPPC) and Strategic Power Devt. Corp. (SPDC) for the portion of paid fixed monthly payments to PSALM.
The decrease in unappropriated retained earnings by P10,888 million was mainly due to the dividends declared and distributions paid by SMC.
The decrease in treasury stock by P6,137 million represents issuance by SMC of 266,666,667 SMC2J Preferred Shares and 183,904,900 SMC2K Preferred Shares, reduced by the redemption by SMC of 279,406,667 SMCP1 Preferred Shares and 89,333,400 SMC2D Preferred Shares.
The increase in non-controlling interests by P58,285 million was mainly due to the: (a) issuance of US$1,350 million SPCS by SMC Global, (b) consolidation of NCC through SMEII effective August 12, 2020 and (c) issuance of P1,500 million RPS by SMEII on July 1, 2020, offset by the: (c) redemption of Series "2" Preferred Shares by SMFB, and (d) share of non-controlling interests on the Group's net income. This was offset by the share of non-controlling interests on cash dividends and distributions declared, and in currency translation adjustments for the year.

The effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents amounted to (P9,452) million, (P3,604) million and (P397) million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, respectively.

The unappropriated retained earnings of the Parent Company is restricted in the amount of P67,093 million in 2020, 2019 and 2018, representing the cost of common shares held in treasury.
The unappropriated retained earnings of the Group include the accumulated earnings in subsidiaries and equity in net earnings of associates and joint ventures not available for declaration as dividends until declared by the respective investees.

Commitments
The outstanding purchase commitments of the Group amounted to P111,845 million as at
December 31, 2020.
Amount authorized but not yet disbursed for capital projects is approximately P255,100 million as at December 31, 2020.
There are no unusual items as to nature and amount affecting assets, liabilities, equity, net income or cash flows, except those stated in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Position and Financial Performance.
There were no material changes in estimates of amounts reported in prior interim periods of the current year or changes in estimates of amounts reported in prior financial years.
There were no known trends, demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will have a material impact on the Group’s liquidity.
There were no known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operation.
There were no known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the Group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation and there were no changes in contingent liabilities and contingent assets, except for Note 24 (c) and Note 43 (a) of the Audited Consolidated Financial Statements as at December 31, 2020.
Except for the Prepared and Packaged Food and Protein segments of the Food division under the Food and Beverage business, which consistently generate higher revenues during the Christmas holiday season, the effects of seasonality or cyclicality on the interim operations of the Group’s businesses are not material.
There were no material off-statements of financial position transactions, arrangements, obligations (including contingent obligations), and other relationship of the Group with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period, except for the outstanding derivative transactions entered by the Group as at and for the period December 31, 2020.