the following discussion and analysis of financial position and results of operations of acen and its subsidiaries should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements as at 31 december 2021, and the restated consolidated financial statements as at 31 december 2020 and 2019. the audited consolidated financial statements have been prepared in compliance with the philippine financial reporting standards.

in january 2021, acen sold, by way of stock rights offering (sro), 2,094,898,876 shares and 172,681,558 shares in first round and second round allocations, respectively, which were subsequently listed with the pse on january 29, 2021.
in april 2021, acen signed a deed of assignment with aceic for the subscription by aceic to, and the issuance to aceic of, 16,685,800,533 shares in exchange for aceic’s 1,701,284,345 common shares and 15,030,279,000 redeemable preferred shares in ac energy international, inc., which holds aceic’s international renewable assets. this is in line with the intention to designate acen as the energy platform of the ayala group, holding all of the group’s energy assets worldwide.

the sec approved acen’s increase in acs from 24.4 billion shares to 48.4 billion shares in june 2021, thus enabling the implementation of the assets-for-share swap between acen and aceic for the latter’s international assets. as such, the 2021 results now present the results of operations of the international assets under acen. prior period financials have similarly been restated, to account for the retroactive impact of the share swap transaction effective july 1, 2019, the date when acen and the offshore companies became under the common control of aceic.

in may 2021, acen completed its follow-on offering (foo) with an offer of 2.01 billion common shares priced at ₱6.50 per share, consisting of 1.58 billion shares sold pursuant to the primary offer, 330.24 million shares sold by aceic and bulacan power pursuant to a secondary offer, and an over-subscription of 100 million secondary shares sold by aceic.

in june 2021, acen and ace endevor signed a deed of absolute sale for transfer of its equity stake in three biopower assets through nibhi to thomaslloyd cti asia holdings pte. ltd., which already indirectly owns over 90% of the economics of these biomass-fired power plants. the divestment of its minority interest in the biomass assets allows acen to focus on the expansion of its core solar and wind businesses.

in september 2021, acen, through its wholly-owned subsidiary, acen finance limited (the issuer), successfully issued its u.s. dollar-denominated senior guaranteed undated fixed-for-life (non-deferrable) green bonds (the bonds) at an aggregate principal amount of us$400.0 million, with a fixed coupon of 4.0% for life, with no step-up and no reset, priced at par.
the bonds are issued under its us$1.5-billion medium-term note program, are guaranteed by acen, and are listed on singapore exchange securities trading (sgx-st).

pricing for the bonds was at 4.0%, which was 45 basis points tighter than the initial price guidance. the final order book volume exceeded us$2.0 billion (more than 5 times oversubscribed), attracting a wide range of high-quality investors.

the philippine sec confirmed that the bonds comply with the requirements under the asean green bonds circular and qualify as an asean green bond. the net proceeds from the bonds will be used to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, new or existing eligible green projects in accordance with the company’s green bond framework (gbf). these include solar energy projects, onshore and offshore wind energy projects, and geothermal energy projects with direct emissions of less than 100g co2/kwh. the gbf sets out well-defined guidelines for the use of proceeds for re projects, with comprehensive monitoring and reporting commitments.

including the parent company’s ₱5.4 billion (us$111.2 million) stock rights offering (sro), ₱10.3 billion (us$212.2 million) follow-on offering (foo), and ₱11.9 billion (us$244.2 million) primary share investment by gic affiliate arran investment pte. ltd. (arran), acen has raised a total of close to us$1.0 billion in fresh capital in 2021, which it can use to fund its goal of 5,000 megawatts (mw) in attributable renewable energy (re) capacity by 2025.

acen ended the year with 3,028mw of attributable capacity in operation and under construction, up from just 1,889mw in the same period in 2020.
50% of the portfolio is located in the philippines, with the other 33.5% spread across the region: indonesia, vietnam, australia and india.
64% of the capacity is operating, while the remaining 36% is still under construction.
83% of the portfolio is powered by renewable energy.
in the philippines, the 120mw gigasol alaminos and 63mw gigasol palauig solar farms have both started operating
in the second quarter, while the 150mw ingrid peaking plant was completed and started operations in october of this year. acen is currently completing the 72mw greencore arayat solar plant, the 160mw gigawind pagudpud wind farm, the 40mwh alaminos battery energy storage project, and the 4mw bataan re tech hub.
despite the pandemic, the group has commenced with its first two solar projects in india, the 140mwdc sitara solar and 70mwdc paryapt solar projects, which have generating power since started in may 2021 and october 2021. the 88mw nihn thuan wind farm in vietnam also completed and started operation in october of this year. the 252mw quang binh wind farm in vietnam has reached commercial operation in november 2021. the group started construction of its first project in australia, the 521mwdc new england solar farm, earlier this year.
the group currently has 2,073mw of attributable renewable energy capacity and is working toward its goal of 5,000mw of renewable energy capacity by 2025, in line with its vision of becoming the largest listed renewables platform in southeast asia.

the group posted consolidated net income attributable to equity holders of the parent company amounting to p=5,250.97 million for the year ended december 31, 2021, up from p=4,288.10 million restated net income in the same period last year.
this includes the results of operations of the international assets that have been infused into acen. currently, none of the international assets are being consolidated by the group, and that the earnings from these assets are reflected under equity in net income of associates and joint ventures, which is presented net of project development expenses for the various power projects under construction and in the pipeline. interest and other financial income from investments in redeemable preferred shares of associates and joint ventures, and from development loans and advances to these companies, are reflected under other income.
net income growth was mainly driven by the growth in operating capacity from acquisitions made in 2020 as well as recently completed renewable energy projects. attributable generation grew 21.3% to 4,632.9 gwh for year ending december 31, 2021, up from 3,818.3 gwh in the same period last year.
challenges in the availability of thermal assets, coupled with high wesm prices, led to an increase in the cost of purchased power during the period, but this was partially offset by improved wind regime.

revenue from sale of electricity increased mainly due to demand recovery, exceeding group’s pre-pandemic level, vis-à-vis the mobility restrictions in the previous year, significant increase in retail contracts, and growth in operating capacity following the acquisition of additional stakes in the islasol and sacasol solar farms last year. gigasol3 and solarace1 have started commercial operations of the 60mwdc palauig solar farm and 120mwdc alaminos solar farm in april and june 2021, respectively, which also contributed to the increase, despite typhoon damages in visayas region transmission and distribution systems towards end of year.
rental income decreased due to the consolidation of islasol and sacasol, which have various lease agreements within the group that have been eliminated following acquisition of majority interest in both companies last march 2020.
dividend income came from upc sidrap, which is recognized as financial asset at fvoci.
other revenue consists of management fees earned by acen from its joint ventures, as well as bulk water sales. management fees drove the increase due to commencement of fees on the international projects starting q2 2021.

costs of sale of electricity increased largely because of the higher cost of purchased power and increased utilization of the diesel plants for power generation given high wesm prices during the sltec outage in the second quarter of the year and preventive maintenance activities in the latter half of the year. power for station use, bunker fuel and
start-up costs also increased due these outages and preventive maintenance activities.
general and administrative expenses include additional =p219.53 million provision for impairment in bsei, which
was partially offset by lower salaries, management and professional fees during the year following the capitalization of project development costs. prior year included one-off transactions such as =p105.48 million incidental expenses and =p186.51 million impairment of investment in nibhi.

interest and other finance charges dropped year-on-year with lower interest on loans and the repayment of short- term loans during the first half of 2021 following acen’s equity capital raising activities. the account included accrual of the interest on green bonds covering the last quarter of the year.
equity in net income of associates and joint ventures increased mainly from income contributions from salak- darajat and nlr with better wind regime in current year and increase in ownership interest from same period last year. the group’s joint venture with bim group, ninh thuan wind farm, and with ami renewables, quang binh wind farm, both in vietnam and have feed-in tariffs (fit), since started commercial operation have contributed equity increase during the year. the increase was partially offset by equity decrease due to predevelopment costs from commencement of construction of the new england solar farm in australia.
other income mainly comprised of interest and other financial income from investments in redeemable preferred shares in associates and joint ventures, and from development loans and advances to associates and joint ventures. other income for the current period also includes p=485 million realized forex gains from acri largely coming from redemption of redeemable preferred shares of uac energy holdings pty (“uach”) last september, =p 254 million guarantee fee income, p=72 million ppe impairment reversals, p=21 million gain on deconsolidation of ingrid and p=42 million realized gain from foreign currency forward contracts. in addition, the group recognized recoveries from investment in nibhi amounting to =p38 million impairment reversal upon the group’s divestment to biomass. prior year included one-off transaction such as p=867 million gain on disposal of investments in infigen accounted as fvtpl.

the decrease in provision for income tax - current was due to the lowering of the income tax rate from 30% to 25% due to the create act.
provision for deferred income tax in 2021 includes recognition of deferred tax of the group’s nolco in current period taxable income.

decrease in cash and cash equivalents were mainly attributable to investments in new projects, capitalized expenditures and ongoing constructions in project companies, net repayment of short-term and long-term loans, and payment of cash dividends. the decrease was net of gross proceeds from sro, foo and arran’s private placement amounting to p=10.27 billion, p=5.37 billion and p=11.88 billion, respectively. this is to fund the group’s various development and operating projects, as well as potential acquisitions. refer to the consolidated statements of cash flows for the detailed movement.
short-term investments include cash placements to cover for expected loan principal and interest repayments upon maturity.
increase in accounts and notes receivable was largely coming from trade with the increase in revenues from sale of electricity. the increase was also due to additional drawdowns of loans and other advances extended by acri for the funding of various projects.
fuel & spare parts went up as a result of sltec’s purchases of spare parts and other direct materials in preparation for maintenance works, coupled with the group’s purchases of fuel which have not yet been consumed as at december 31, 2021.
current financial assets at fvoci were reduced with the full redemption of (acri’s) investment in aycfl redeemable preferred shares.
increase in current portion of input vat mainly driven by input tax from purchases of various materials needed for construction and maintenance of various plants and services procured.
creditable withholding tax went up due to improvement in collection of acen’s receivable from retail customers and unutilized cwt.
other current assets increased primarily due to acen’s foreign exchange forward contracts maturing within 12- month period, sltec’s advances to contractors and group’s prepaid taxes.
assets held for sale include power barges (pb) 101, 102 and 103 valued at its fair value less cost to sell amount. the account also includes building improvements, machineries, tools, and equipment of acen and bsei that are available for immediate sale.
investments in associates and joint ventures increased mainly due to the reclassification of ingrid from subsidiary to joint venture (p=1.2 billion) following the effectivity of the shareholder agreement with aphpc on march 2021. there are also new joint venture investments reported during the period such as greencore3, solar philippines and natures renewable energy development corporation (naredco), and additional investment in upc-ace australia. accumulated equity in net earnings increased for the period largely coming from philwind (p=974 million) and salak-darajat (p=1.1 billion) but reduced by p=1.7 billion total dividend payout and nibhi divestment.
investments in other financial assets at amortized cost include investments in redeemable preferred shares of, and convertible loans extended to associates and joint ventures. these increased with additional subscriptions into redeemable preferred shares of various international projects, as well as additional loan facilities extended.
noncurrent financial assets at fvtpl includes compulsorily convertible debentures (ccds) from masaya solar. masaya solar is currently constructing the 420mwp solar farm in the central indian state of madhya pradesh.
noncurrent financial assets at fvoci are largely the investment in upc sidrap and also include golf club shares and listed equity instruments.
plant, property and equipment’s increased mainly due to completion of gigasol3’s solar power plant in palauig, zambales, and solarace1’s solar power plant in alaminos, laguna, capitalization of =p1.8 billion for balaoi wind farm project in ilocos through bwpc and p=1.1 billion for the alaminos battery energy storage system (bess) project through giga ace 4. the group also had p=135.8 million capitalized borrowing costs from project companies during the year. the increase was partially offset by =p590 million coming from ingrid’s deconsolidation.
right-of-use asset’s decrease came from deconsolidation of ingrid. during the year, acen entered into an office lease agreement with ali, offset by amortizations.
investment properties includes bulacan power’s land amounting to p=13.09 million. decrease is due to reclassification to property, plant and equipment of a land owned by bchc amounting to p=283.86 million which are leased out to other subsidiaries of the group.
accounts and notes receivable – net of current portion increased primarily due to loans receivable from greencore amounting to p=2.2 billion and to non-current portion of loans and interest receivable of acri from related parties amounting to p=6.2 billion.
goodwill & other intangible assets decreased coming from amortizations for the period.
majority of the balance of deferred tax asset came from recognition on accrued expenses, nolco, mcit and lease liabilities. deferred tax asset of the group went down mainly due to the application of the group’s nolco in current
period taxable income.
input vat non-current decreased due to reclassification of input vat to current as well as deconsolidation of ingrid with p=266 million input vat from importations.
other non-current assets include various advances to contractors for the ongoing project developments.
accounts payable and other current liabilities decreased following the full settlement of p=2.04 billion payables to aphpc this september for the acquisition of 20% interest in sltec through the assignment of aceic to acen in 2019. the decrease was partially offset by increase in trade payables.
short-term loans decreased on repayments of bank loans to bdo (=p2.00 billion), cbc (=p1.35 billion) and secb (p=800 million). availments during the period amounting to =p2.00 billion and p=1.00 billion from rcbc and bdo, respectively, were paid in full during the year.
current portion of long-term loans increased due to reclassifications of currently maturing principal within 12- month period, offset by repayments during the year.
current portion of lease liability increased due to new office lease agreement with ali.
decrease in income and withholding taxes payable was mainly due to settlement of income tax payable of acri.
notes payable pertains to the us$400.0 million u.s. dollar-denominated senior guaranteed undated fixed-for-life (non-deferrable) green bonds (the bonds) issued and listed in sgx-st.
long-term loans - net of current portion decreased due to the principal repayments by acen (p=964 million), guimaras wind (p=130 million), npdc (=p140 million) and bwpc (=p178 million). the decrease was offset by the new loans availed by acen and bwpc amounting to p=805 million and =p33 million, respectively, to fund various development and operating projects. sltec also paid principal amortization payment (p=225 million) and cash sweep prepayment (p=500 million).
lease liabilities-net of current portion increased mainly due to new office lease agreements with ali.
pension and other employment benefits increased due to accrual of retirement expense for the year.
majority of the balance of deferred income tax liabilities came from recognition on unrealized foreign exchange gains and right-of-use assets of the group as at period ended.
other non-current liabilities include p=1.13 billion trade payables in relation to a multilateral agreement signed by the group, pemc and other wesm participants. these also include contract liabilities and asset retirement obligations related to solar operations.
capital stock and additional paid in capital increased by 2.27 billion shares at p=2.37 from sro, 4 billion shares at p=2.97 from the private placement with arran and 1.58 billion shares at p=6.50 from foo. proceeds from the sro were used to fund ongoing solar power projects of solarace1, gigasol3 and greencore 3 power solutions, inc. as well as other projects such as investment into a renewable energy laboratory, and funding for up to u.s.$100 million for new technology investments in the philippines. acen plans to utilize the proceeds of the private placement as follows:
funding of the development and construction of the group’s renewable energy projects, including its arayat solar project in pampanga and bayog wind project in ilocos norte, as well as possible expansions of existing plants and acquisition of other operating plants, of approximately up to p=10 billion, estimated to be used in the 1st half of 2021 at the earliest;
repayment of debt drawn earlier to fund development funding requirements; and funding of working capital requirements and for general corporate purposes of approximately up to p=500 million, estimated to be used in the first quarter of 2021 at the earliest.
proceeds from the foo will be used to partially fund the development of renewable power projects in the pipeline and inorganic growth opportunities in and when they arise, repayment of loans and reduction of payables, and other general corporate requirements. there were also 8.19 million shares granted through the employee stock ownership plan of the group.
the movement in other equity reserves pertain to the impact of the share swap transaction with aceic to acquire the latter’s ownership interest in various international business and assets (“offshore companies”) in exchange for acen’s issuance of additional primary shares via a tax-free exchange, which rendered prior period restatement to account for the retroactive impact. this business combination of entities under common control had a =p48.08 billion excess impact over subscription price from the acquisition. excess of consideration from acquisitions of non- controlling interest in mspdc and northwind amounted p=261.73 million and =p723.97 million, respectively.
the decrease in unrealized fv loss on equity instruments at fvoci came from mark-to-market loss for upc sidrap for the current period and reversal of unrealized fair value gain upon redemption of aycfl shares.
unrealized fair value gain on derivative instruments designated as hedges decreased due to winding down of acen’s coal swap transactions which were all sold in third quarter of the year. the account also include bwpc’s mark-to-market gains from foreign exchange forward contracts.
remeasurement loss on defined benefit plan decreased parallel to various actuarial loss and loss on return on plan assets.
the increase in accumulated share in other comprehensive loss of associates and joint ventures came from share in remeasurement loss from defined benefit obligation of associate and joint venture.
retained earnings increased from resulting net income earned for the period offset by p=1.20 billion dividends declared last march 19,2021 and paid last april 19, 2021.
treasury shares decreased during the period through the offer of secondary shares during the foo.
non-controlling interests are mainly comprised of redeemable preferred shares (rps) of acec held by acefil. non-controlling interests’ share in net income amounted to =p2.42 billion, which was offset by dividends totaling p=2.23 billion. there were also capital redemptions amounting to =p47.50 million in northwind, p=830.98 million ($16.31 million) in uac energy holdings pty (“uach”) and p=19.51 billion ($400.00 million) in acec. the group also acquired the non-controlling interest in mspdc and northwind with carrying amount of p=18.77 million and p=294.8 million, respectively.

current ratio & acid test ratio increased due to higher liquid assets such as receivables at period end alongside the decrease in current liabilities primarily from short-term loans repayment.
significant increase in d/e ratio was driven by additional liabilities with the issuance of bonds despite the increase in equity accounts. asset-to-equity ratio also increased as the increase in total assets outpaced the increase in total equity.
higher net income before interest and taxes coupled with lower interest expense following debt settlements yield to higher interest coverage ratio for the current year.
the increase in total debt and increase in cash and cash equivalents combined with lower capital accounts and retained earnings at year-end resulted to a lift in the ratio.
return on equity partially decreased despite higher net income year-on-year, while return on assets registered an increase due to higher generation capacities combined with the increase in the group’s total assets, as compared in the same period last year.
asset turnover’s increase mainly attributable to the group’s efficiency in generating revenue from its assets, alongside the inclusion of international operations to acen.

there were no events that triggered direct or contingent financial obligation that was material to the group. there were no contingent assets or contingent liabilities since the last annual balance sheet date.
there were no material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships of the parent company with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
there were no material events that had occurred subsequent to the balance sheet date except for the events after the reporting period disclosed in note 39 of the audited consolidated financial statements.
acen has material commitments to invest in capital expenditure projects mainly in the following:
288mw solar project in buguey and lal-lo, cagayan and the proposed 275mw expansion of gigasol palauig solar project in zambales.
120mwdc solar power project in alaminos, laguna through solarace1;
150mw diesel plant in pililla, rizal through ingrid, a joint venture of acen, ace endevor and aphpc o 60mwdc solar power project in palauig, zambales through gigasol3;
50mwac (72mwdc) solar power project in arayat and mexico, pampanga through greencore 3, a joint venture of acen, ace endevor and citicore;
500mw solar power project in san marcelino, zambales through santa cruz solar;
2x20 mw alaminos battery energy storage system (bess) project through giga ace 4;
160mw wind farm in balaoi, pagudpud, ilocos norte through bwpc, in partnership with upc renewables;
investment into 4mw renewable energy laboratory in bataan through bsei;
521mwdc new england solar farm (nesf) and adjacent 50mw battery energy storage system located near uralla in new south wales through upc-ace australia, a joint venture of acen and upc renewables australia.
various vietnam wind farms:
252mw wind farm in quang binh through ami renewables energy joint stock company
88mw wind farm in ninh thuan through bim energy joint stock co.(“bime”)
40mw second phase of the mui ne wind farm in binh thuan through the partnership with
the blue circle.
60mw lac hoa & hoa dong wind farm in soc trang through a joint venture with upc funding of up to u.s.$100 million for new technology investments in the philippines. refer to notes to consolidated financial statements for the details.
any known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that were reasonably expected to have material favorable or unfavorable impact on net revenues/income from continuing operations
the results of operations of acen and its subsidiaries depend to a significant extent, on the performance of the philippine economy.
the current highly competitive environment, operation of priority-dispatch variable renewable energy, and community quarantines resulted in lower demand for electricity and have driven market prices of electricity downward.
movements in the wesm prices could have a significant favorable or unfavorable impact on the group’s financial results.
any known trends or any known demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the registrant’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way - the group is developing a line-up of renewable energy projects as part of its growth aspiration. the capital expenditures shall be funded by a combination of equity and debt. several capital raising activities were executed in 2021: the 2.27 billion shares sold through sro, the subscription by arran to 4 billion primary shares pursuant to a private placement, and the issuance of 1.58 billion primary shares for foo.
there were no significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations that had material effect on the financial condition or results of operations.
there were no operations subject to seasonality and cyclicality except for the operation of wind farms. the wind regime is high during the northeast monsoon (“amihan”) season in the first and fourth quarter when wind turbines generate more power to be supplied to the grid. the generation drops in the second and third quarter due to low wind regime brought about by the southwest monsoon (“habagat”).