total assets decreased by 17.7% to p=652.9 billion on account of decreases in due from bsp, investment securities at amortized cost, loans and receivables - net, property, equipment and right-of-use assets, assets of a disposal group classified as held for sale, and other assets tempered by increases in cash and other cash items, due from other banks, interbank loans receivable and spura, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income, investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures, investment properties – net, deferred tax assets, and intangible assets.
increase in cash and other cash items by p=3.4 billion or 34.7% can be attributed to the bank’s daily operations and decrease in due from bsp by p=8.7 billion or 15.6% is due to asset-liability management. due from other banks increased by 8.2% or p=0.8 billion due to increased level of working balances with counterparty banks. interbank loans receivable and spura with the bsp increased by p=17.6 billion or 1,658.7% due to increased level of placements.
financial assets at fair value through profit or loss increased by p=5.9 billion or 120.9% to p=10.7 billion due to trading related activities of the bank and reclassification of the bank’s investment portfolio as a result of a change in the business model. financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income increased by p=44.0 billion to p=68.8 billion or 178.1% mainly due to purchases during the year.
investment securities at amortized cost decreased to p=23.4 billion by p=185.6 billion or 88.8% mainly due to disposals of securities held as a result of the change in bank’s business model for managing htc securities and the reclassification of the remaining securities as discussed above.
loans and receivables decreased by 2.2% to p=438.9 billion from p=448.6 billion in 2019 primarily attributable to the increase in group’s provisions for credit losses during the year and tightened credit standards.
increase in investments in subsidiaries and joint ventures is attributed to the accounting of investment in sb finance company, inc. (sbfci) as a joint venture after the completed sale of 50% outstanding shares of sbfci to the bank of ayudhya public company ltd. (bay), commonly known as krungsri.
property, equipment and right-of-use assets decreased by 6.6% to p=5.5 billion due to depreciation and amortization during the year, while investment properties increased by 3.0% to p=1.1 billion due to real and other properties foreclosed during the year.
deferred tax assets increased by 218.0% from p=2.3 billion as of year-end 2019 due to additional provision for credit losses to p=7.3 billion in 2020. intangible assets grew by 3.0% to p=2.7 billion with the additional software costs during the period.
disposal group classified as held for sale decreased to nil amount as a result of the strategic partnership of the bank with krungsri. on october 20, 2020, after obtaining regulatory approvals in the philippines and in thailand, the bank completed the sale of 50% outstanding shares of sbfci to krungsri.
other assets decreased by 61.5% to p=3.6 billion from p=9.2 billion due to decrease in cash collaterals related to bank’s trading activities.
total liabilities decreased by 21.5% or p=145.2 billion to p=529.5 billion on account of decreases in all line items namely deposit liabilities, financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, derivative liabilities designated as hedges, bills payable and securities sold under repurchase agreements (ssura), acceptances payable, margin deposits, manager’s and certified checks outstanding, income tax payable, notes and bonds payable, accrued interest, taxes and other expenses, liabilities of disposal group classified as held for sale and other liabilities.
deposit liabilities went down by 11.9% from p=499.6 billion as of year-end 2019 to p=440.4 billion mainly contributed by the decrease in time deposits.
financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss decreased by 0.5% to p=1.1 billion attributable to lower valuation of the bank’s derivative liabilities. derivative liabilities designated as hedges decreased to nil from p=4.9 billion in 2019 due to bank’s termination of its interest rate swap agreements that resulted from the discontinuation of hedge accounting. bills payable and ssura decreased by 77.5% to p=21.1 billion due to decrease in the bank’s repo transactions and maturities of short-term borrowings from bsp.
acceptances payable decreased by 11.0% to p=0.4 billion. margin deposits and cash letters of credit decreased by 93.3% to p=61.8 million. manager’s and certified checks outstanding at p=3.9 billion decreased by p=0.3 billion or 6.3%.
income tax payable decreased to p=61.5 million from year-end 2019’s p=358.4 million due to lower income tax liability for the 4th quarter of 2020 versus the last quarter of 2019. notes and bonds payable decreased by p=2.5 billion or 5.1%, due to maturity of $300.0 million senior unsecured notes, offset by the issuance of fixed rate bonds during the year. accrued interest, taxes and other expenses decreased by 18.1% to p=3.7 billion. other liabilities went down by 0.4% to p=13.1 billion.
total equity grew by 4.2% to p=123.3 billion on account of net income during the period. surplus was up by 6.4% due to the net income during the period. net unrealized gain on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income of the parent increased by 126.4% due to increase in market valuation of outstanding debt securities while that of the subsidiaries decreased by 59.5% due to decrease in market valuation of outstanding equity securities. cumulative foreign currency translation increased by p=615.0 million.
the capital adequacy ratio (car) is 20.09% in december 2020. this is well above bsp minimum requirement of 10% and international standard of 8%, indicative of the sufficiency of the bank’s capital to support the current level of its risk assets.

net income attributable to the bank’s equity holders amounted to p=7.4 billion for the period ended december 31, 2020 from a year ago level of p=10.1 billion or a decrease of 26.4%. this translates to earnings per share of p=9.86 from p=13.40 for the period ended december 31, 2019.

interest income ended lower than prior period by 8.7% or p=3.9 billion mainly on account of tempered asset levels and lower market yields on the bank’s loan and investment portfolios. interest income on loans and receivables grew by 1.2% or p0.4 billion due to expansion in loans and receivables on a period-on-period basis. interest income on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and investment securities at amortized cost decreased by 61.5% or p=5.7 billion on account of the disposal of securities. interest income on deposits with banks and others dropped by 20.0% due to decrease in volume of transactions. interest income on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss grew by p=1.3 billion on account of reclassification discussed above. increase in interest income on interbank loans receivables and spura with the bsp by 44.8% or p=0.1 billion was due to the increase in volume of placements during the period.

interest expense decreased by 44.1% or p=7.7 billion from prior period. interest expense on deposits decreased by 50.8% or p=5.3 billion due to decrease in volume of high yielding deposits on a period-on-period basis and the resulting improvement in deposit mix in favor of lower yielding deposits. interest expense on derivative instruments decreased by p=0.3 billion. interest expense on subordinated note, notes and bonds payable, bills payable and spura and other borrowings dropped by 42.9% or p=2.5 billion due to maturity of $300.0 million senior unsecured notes on february 3, 2020 as well as maturity of other bills payable. the bank also exercised its call option on its p=10.0 billion 5.375% unsecured subordinated notes in july 2019. interest expense on lease liabilities increased by 8.4% to p=0.1 billion compared to 2019 on a period-on- period basis.
net interest income increased to p=30.6 billion, 14.2% or p=3.8 billion growth compared to 2019 on a period- on-period basis.

other income grew to p=19.7 billion or 177.6% increase mainly due to securities trading gain growth to p=13.4 billion, a p=11.8 billion increase period-on-period basis. foreign exchange gains increased by p=13.3 million, profit from assets sold/exchanged increased by p=260.8 million during the period on account of higher gains on acquisition and sale of foreclosed properties. miscellaneous income increased by p=1.2 billion mainly due to the completed 50% sale of outstanding shares of sbfci to krungsri in 2020. service charges, fees and commissions decreased by p=0.5 billion or 11.1% due to lower transaction volumes. the decrease in share in net income of joint ventures by p=218.8 million is attributable to the bank’s share in the net income of sbm leasing, inc. and share in net loss of sbfci during the period.

operating expenses (excluding provisions for credit and impairment losses) were higher by 13.6% or p=2.4 billion. taxes and licenses increased by 4.9%. occupancy costs decreased by p=11.7 million. compensation and fringe benefits increased by 14.8% while depreciation and amortization increased by 7.6%. amortization of software costs and miscellaneous expenses increased by 19.0% and 19.5%, respectively.

provision for credit losses increased by p=22.2 billion as a result of the bank’s proactive stance towards the current economic environment. provision for impairment losses grew by p=26.3 million mainly coming from the increase of provision on investment properties.

benefit from income tax amounted to p=3.2 billion for the period ended december 31, 2020 in comparison to p=2.3 billion provision for income tax in 2019, due to higher benefit from deferred income tax resulting from additional provision for credit losses.

total comprehensive income for the period ended december 31, 2020 amounted to p=7.3 billion, decreased by 34.4% compared to p=11.1 billion in 2019 on a period-on-period basis on account of lower net income and net unrealized gain on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income.

the bank’s liquidity is sufficient with a liquid-assets-to-total-assets ratio of 29.45% in 2020, 39.71% in 2019 and 43.84% in 2018. liquid assets consist of cash and other cash items, due from bsp, due from other banks, interbank loans receivable, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and investment securities at amortized cost.
liquidity risk is defined as the risk that the bank will not be able to meet its obligations when they become due. it may be classified into two sub-types:
1. funding liquidity risk, the risk that a firm cannot obtain the necessary funds to meet its obligations as they fall due. it stems from the mismatch of asset, liability, exchange contract and contingent commitment maturities.
2. trading liquidity risk, the risk that an entity will be unable to unwind a position in a particular instrument at or near its market value because of lack of depth or disruption in the market for that instrument.
with liquidity being the lifeline of banks, the risk is mainly monitored through tools such as liquidity gap reports including the maximum cumulative outflow (mco) status, liquidity ratios and assessment of deposit concentration. this is further augmented by periodic liquidity stress testing. regular reports are then provided to senior management, the alco and the roc regarding these tools. moreover, the bank has established contingency funding plans to deal with potential liquidity crisis situations.
rmg assists the alco by providing the relevant information with respect to the management of all risks related to the group’s assets and liabilities, and the trading and accrual books. the impact of the group’s activities on capital is also monitored by the alco with the rmg providing the necessary data to the committee for assessment. results of their analysis are reported on a periodic basis to the roc. through the alco, rmg provides an independent assessment of the depth and magnitude of funding liquidity risk that the bank takes and suggests ways that can be explored to enhance the bank’s liquidity risk profile or keep exposure within risk appetite. rmg also provides its views on proposals or strategies concerning balance sheet structure, funding mix or concentration, and bond or note issuance.
events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the company, including any default or acceleration of an obligation
there were no events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the company, including any default or acceleration of an obligation.
off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, contingent obligations and other relationships of the company with unconsolidated entities or other persons
the bank has outstanding commitments, contingent liabilities, bank guarantees and tax assessments that arose from the normal course of operations. the bank does not anticipate losses that will materially affect its financial position and results of operations as a result of these transactions.


the bank’s commitments for capital expenditures will be funded out of cash flows from operations. this covers investments in electronic systems to comply with regulatory requirements (e.g. electronic money laundering monitoring system), investments in other systems (e.g. core banking, finance and accounting systems, credit evaluation system), upgrades of existing systems (e.g. telecommunications system), expansion of the bank’s electronic banking channels, atm installations, renovation or relocation or branch premises, and investments for new branches.

in the normal course of operations, the bank’s activities are affected by changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and other market changes. the bank follows a prudent policy on managing its assets and liabilities so as to ensure that exposure to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates are kept within acceptable limits and within regulatory guidelines.


on october 20, 2020, after obtaining regulatory approvals in the philippines and in thailand, the bank completed the sale of the 7,075,000 sbfci shares to krungsri. the bank recorded a gain amounting to p=933.1 million.

there are no significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations of the bank.


the bank’s financial position or results of operations are not affected by seasonal aspects.

the recession in 2020 caused the country’s gdp to fall 9.5% year-on-year. our 2021 gdp growth forecast of 7.1% so far hinges on the ongoing accommodative monetary policy and prudent fiscal support, further easing of community quarantine measures coupled with enforcement of health and safety protocols and improving business and consumer confidence on the back of vaccine availability and distribution by 2h21. various factors may impact the economic outlook both favorably or negatively.