total assets increased by 3.4% to p=793.0 billion on account of increases in due from other banks, interbank loans receivable and securities purchased under resale agreements (spura) with the bsp, loans and receivables, investment in a joint venture, property and equipment, investment properties, deferred tax assets, intangible assets, assets of disposal group classifies as held for sale and other assets tempered by decreases in cash and other cash items, due from bsp, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and investment securities at amortized cost.
decrease in cash and other cash items by p=2.0 billion or 17.1% can be attributed to the bank’s daily operations and decrease in due from bsp by p=7.5 billion or 11.8% is due to asset-liability management. due from other banks increased by 2.9% or p=0.3 billion due to increased level of working balances with counterparty banks. interbank loans receivable and spura with the bsp increased by p=0.8 billion or 404.7% due to increased level of placements.
financial assets at fair value through profit or loss decreased by p=83.1million or 1.7% to p=4.9 billion due to trading related activities of the bank. financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income decreased by p=9.6 billion to p=24.7 billion or 27.9% due to disposals and maturities during the year.
investment securities at amortized cost decreased to p=208.9 billion by p=3.2 billion or 1.5% mainly due to foreign exchange translation adjustments and maturities during the year.
loans and receivables increased by 7.8% to p=448.6 billion from p=416.3 billion in 2018 primarily attributable to the growth of consumer loans.
property, equipment and right-of-use assets increased by 43.4% to p=5.9 billion due to acquisitions and philippine financial reporting standards (pfrs) 16 implementation, while investment properties increased by 30.5% to p=1.1 billion due to real and other properties foreclosed during the period.
deferred tax assets increased by 21.7% from p=1.9 billion as of year-end 2018. intangible assets grew by 12.7% to p=2.6 billion with the additional software costs during the period.
disposal group classified as held for sale arises as a result of the strategic partnership of the bank with the bank of ayudhya public company ltd. (bay), commonly known as krungsri. the agreement involves the sale of 50% of the outstanding shares or 7,075,000 shares of sb finance company, inc. (sbfci) to krungsri. as a result, the group reclassified all the assets and liabilities of sbfci to ‘assets of disposal group classified as held for sale’ and ‘liabilities of disposal group classified as held for sale’, respectively, in the consolidated statement of financial position.
other assets increased by 125.8% to p=9.2 billion due to increase in cash collaterals related to bank’s trading activities.
total liabilities increased by 2.6% or p=17.3 billion to p=674.7 billion on account of increases in deposit liabilities, derivative liabilities designated as hedges, manager’s and certified checks outstanding, income tax payable, notes and bonds payable, liabilities of disposal group classified as held for sale and other liabilities tempered by decreases in financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss, bills payable and securities sold under repurchase agreements (ssura), acceptances payable, margin deposits and cash letters of credit, subordinated note, and accrued interest, taxes and other expenses.
deposit liabilities went up by 2.2% from p=488.9 billion as of year-end 2018 to p=499.6 billion contributed by increases in demand and time deposits offset by decreases in savings deposit and long-term negotiable certificates of deposit.
financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss decreased by 37.7% to p=1.1 billion attributable to lower valuation of the bank’s derivative liabilities. derivative liabilities designated as hedges increased to p=4.9 billion from p=1.5 billion in 2018. bills payable and ssura decreased by 9.3% to p=93.6 billion due to decrease in the bank’s repo transactions and maturities of short-term borrowings from bsp.
acceptances payable decreased by 20.5% to p=0.5 billion. margin deposits and cash letters of credit decreased by 1.9% to p=920.7 million. manager’s and certified checks outstanding at p=4.1 billion grew by p=0.8 billion or 25.8%.
income tax payable increased to p=358.4 million from year-end 2018’s p=30.3 million due to higher income tax liability for the 4th quarter of 2019 versus the last quarter of 2018. notes and bonds payable increased by p=16.8 billion or 53.3%, due to issuance of fixed rate bonds, foreign currency translation adjustment and amortization of debt issue costs. subordinated note is nil as of december 31, 2019 as a result of exercising the call option of the p=10 billion 5.375% unsecured subordinated notes in july 2019. accrued interest, taxes and other expenses decreased by 15.6% to p=4.6 billion. other liabilities went up by 26.8% to p=13.1 billion due to recognition of lease liabilities as a result of adopting pfrs 16.
total equity grew by 8.0% to p=118.3 billion on account of net income during the period. surplus was up by 11.8% due to the net income during the period. net unrealized gain on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income of the parent increased by 308.0% due to increase in market valuation of outstanding debt securities while that of the subsidiaries increased by 1.6% due to increase in market valuation of outstanding equity securities. cumulative foreign currency translation decreased by p=36.0 million.
the capital adequacy ratio (car) is 17.88% in december 2019. this is well above bsp minimum requirement of 10% and international standard of 8%, indicative of the sufficiency of the bank’s capital to support the current level of its risk assets.
net income attributable to the bank’s equity holders amounted to p=10.1 billion for the period ended december 31, 2019 from a year ago level of p=8.6 billion or an increase of 17.3%. this translates to earnings per share of p=13.40 from p=11.42 for the period ended december 31, 2018.
interest income
interest income ended higher than prior period by 30.2% or p=10.2 billion mainly on account of increase in loan-related activities during the period. interest income on loans and receivables grew by 40.5% or p=9.7 billion due to expansion in loans & receivables on a period-on-period basis. interest income on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and investment securities at amortized cost and interest income on financial assets at fair value through profit or loss grew by p=327.7 million or 3.7% and p=110.3 million or 12.7% , respectively, on account of higher adbs of securities portfolio. increase in interest income on interbank loans receivables and spura with the bsp by 108.9% or p=146.1 million was due to the increase in volume of placements during the period. interest income on deposits with banks and others dropped by 32.3% to p=67.8 million due to decrease in volume of transactions.
interest expense went up by 32.1% or p=4.2 billion from prior period. interest expense on deposits increased by 28.0% or p=2.3 billion due to increase in volume of high yielding deposits on a period-on-period basis. interest expense on derivative instruments went up by 1.3%. interest expense on subordinated note, notes and bonds payable, bills payable and spura and other borrowings grew by 42.6% or p= 1.8 billion due to increase in volume of transactions. interest expense on lease liabilities amounting to p= 128.9 million resulted from adopting pfrs 16 in 2019.
net interest income increased to p=26.8 billion, 28.9% or p=6.0 billion growth compared to 2018 on a period- on-period basis.

other income grew to p=7.1 billion or 48.7% due to service charges, fees and commissions growth by p= 1.2 billion or 39.5% due to higher transaction volumes, securities trading gain amounted to p=1.5 billion, up by p=1.2 billion or 320.2%, foreign exchange gains increased by p=48.0 million, and rent income increased by 26.3% due to rental of bank properties. profit from assets sold/exchanged decreased by p=130.2 million during the period on account of lower gains on acquisition and sale of foreclosed properties. miscellaneous income decreased by p=28.3 million. share in net income of a joint venture of p=23.8 million is attributable to the bank’s share in the net income of sbm leasing, inc. during the period.

operating expenses (excluding provisions for credit and impairment losses) were higher by 25.8% or p=3.6 billion. taxes and licenses increased by 79.0% due to higher documentary stamp tax paid on account of higher volume of deposits while occupancy costs decreased by 66.4% significantly due to implementation of pfrs 16. compensation and fringe benefits increased by 13.0% while provision for credit losses increased by p=3.5 billion. depreciation and amortization increased by 64.0% significantly due to implementation of pfrs 16. amortization of software costs and miscellaneous expenses increased by 35.9% and 30.8%, respectively. recovery of impairment losses increased by p=1.5 million.

provision for income tax amounted to p=2.3 billion for the period ended december 31, 2019 or 6.6% lower than in 2018 on a period-on-period basis.

total comprehensive income for the period ended december 31, 2019 amounted to p=11.1 billion increased by 52.0% compared to p=7.3 billion in 2018 on a period-on-period basis on account of higher net income and net unrealized gain on financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income.

the bank’s liquidity is adequate with a liquid-assets-to-total-assets ratio of 39.71% in 2019, 43.84% in 2018 and 44.88% in 2017. liquid assets consist of cash and other cash items, due from bsp, due from other banks, interbank loans receivable, financial assets at fair value through profit or loss, financial assets at fair value through other comprehensive income and investment securities at amortized cost.
liquidity risk is defined as the risk that the bank will not be able to meet its obligations when they become due. it may be classified into two sub-types:
1. funding liquidity risk, the risk that a firm cannot obtain the necessary funds to meet its obligations as
they fall due. it stems from the mismatch of asset, liability, exchange contract and contingent commitment
maturities.
2. trading liquidity risk, the risk that an entity will be unable to unwind a position in a particular instrument
at or near its market value because of lack of depth or disruption in the market for that instrument.
with liquidity being the lifeline of banks, the risk is mainly monitored through tools such as liquidity gap reports including the maximum cumulative outflow (mco) status, liquidity ratios and assessment of deposit concentration. this is further augmented by periodic liquidity stress testing. regular reports are then provided to senior management, the alco and the roc regarding these tools. moreover, the bank has established contingency funding plans to deal with potential liquidity crisis situations.
rmg assists the alco by providing the relevant information with respect to the management of all risks related to the group’s assets and liabilities, and the trading and accrual books. the impact of the group’s activities on capital is also monitored by the alco with the rmg providing the necessary data to the committee for assessment. results of their analysis are reported on a periodic basis to the roc. through the alco, rmg provides an independent assessment of the depth and magnitude of funding liquidity risk that the bank takes, and suggests ways that can be explored to enhance the bank’s liquidity risk profile, or keep exposure within risk appetite. rmg also provides its views on proposals or strategies concerning balance sheet structure, funding mix or concentration, and bond or note issuance.
events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the company, including any default or acceleration of an obligation
there were no events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is material to the company, including any default or acceleration of an obligation.
off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, contingent obligations and other relationships of the company with unconsolidated entities or other persons
the bank has outstanding commitments, contingent liabilities, bank guarantees and tax assessments that arose from the normal course of operations. the bank does not anticipate losses that will materially affect its financial position and results of operations as a result of these transactions.

the bank’s commitments for capital expenditures will be funded out of cash flows from operations. this covers investments in electronic systems to comply with regulatory requirements (e.g. electronic money laundering monitoring system), investments in other systems (e.g. credit evaluation system), upgrades of existing systems (e.g. telecommunications system), expansion of the bank’s electronic banking channels, atm installations, renovation or relocation or branch premises, and investments for new branches.

in the normal course of operations, the bank’s activities are affected by changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and other market changes. the bank follows a prudent policy on managing its assets and liabilities so as to ensure that exposure to fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates are kept within acceptable limits and within regulatory guidelines.

there are no significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations of the bank.

the bank’s financial position or results of operations are not affected by seasonal aspects.

the philippine economy in 2019 sustained decent growth 5.9%, starting with challenges in the first half from a delayed budget to a rebound in the second half on the back of catch up spending, normalizing inflation, and strong private consumption - retaining its label as one of the fastest growing in the asian region. with 2020 off to a rocky start, we expect solid macroeconomic fundamentals to partially insulate the country from a looming global slowdown due to the virus outbreak, and showcase its resilience despite hits from external headwinds. we anticipate growth for 2020 to be at or above 6.1%.
