the group is presented into two segments: scotch whisky (representing the uk operations) and brandy (representing the philippine and` spanish operations, including the fundador and domecq operations starting march 2016 and september 2017, respectively). blc is a joint venture which is accounted for under the equity method and reported under the brandy segment.


the year 2020 was marked by the challenges attributed to covid-19 pandemic that prompted key changes in consumer attitudes and revolutionized the market landscape. the outbreak of covid-19, a novel strain of coronavirus, spread fast worldwide. what was declared as a ‘public health emergency of international concern’ in january soon became a pandemic in march [who’s declaration made on march 11], as it had reached 114 countries and territories, including the philippines, spain and uk where the group operates. the pandemic has affected 222 countries and territories and only fourteen countries and territories have no reported cases of covid-19 as of january 31, 2021. the governments across the world responded immediately and implemented extensive measures at varying degrees, such as travel bans/restrictions, lockdowns, home isolation (stay-at-home orders), physical distancing (including in work places), limited gathering and closing of non-essential businesses (all types of recreational venues and most public places included). almost the whole country was under lockdown from the second half of march 2020, which paralyzed all non- essential business activities, and liquor bans were imposed by most localities. restrictions have started to ease through a four-phase program from mid-may, as the governments tried to balance economic and health concerns. our local operations have resumed in accordance with government directives, amidst localized lockdowns and liquor bans across the country. spain, uk and mexico have localized lockdowns and substantially closed on-trade business, yet our plants keep operating. these stay-at-home occasions plus the health awareness concerns prompted key changes that pivot to off-trade and e-commerce channels. safety health protocols of wearing face mask (plus face shield in the philippines), maintaining social distance and frequent hand washing/disinfection stayed on as a must-do-everyday routine [and continuing as of the date of this report]. it is in this general background that the group operated in 2020.

the group exhibited strong results during the year amidst the pandemic challenges. net profit to owners soared 18% year-on-year to a record-high of p8.0 billion while revenues went up 2% year-on- year to p52.8 billion, attesting to the strength of the group’s diversified portfolio and global operations. while on-trade and global travel retail had been affected by the lockdowns and dry law implementation, the group took advantage of the buoyant off-trade and e-commerce channels as well as new open markets to increase sales. emperador was able to navigate through the challenges, adapting to the new consumption trends and streamlining efficiencies. gross profit margin remained healthy at 31% while net profit to owners margin was higher at 15% as compared to 13% a year ago.
the brandy segment realized a 20% soar in net profit to owners to p5.7 billion from p4.8 billion a year ago as it turned over p36.9 billion revenues from external customers, a 2% dip year-on-year. the business was affected by the two-month hard lockdown from mid-march up to mid-may, when local production and distribution were completely suspended in compliance with government directive, and the liquor bans imposed in most localities. while bodegas fundador was able to continue its regular production and distribution in jerez, on-trade sales was affected but off-trade and e-commerce were strong and international market resilient. when borders began opening up in june, sales picked up in europe, asia and americas. ‘fundador light’ and ‘fundador double light’ were made available in north america. ‘terry centenario’ remained as the fastest growing brandy and market leader in spain cornering about one-fourth of the market. ‘tres cepas’ expanded market share in guinea and cameroon. ‘emperador’ garnered a leading 37% share of the market volume of the top three local manufacturers in the philippines. the segment’s gross profit margin slightly moved to 28% due to product mix and spike of cost inputs from abroad. the segment’s net profit to owners’ rate improved to 15% as the group observed prudence in its operating expenditures.

the scotch whisky segment ended the year with p16.0 billion revenues to external customers, a 14% surge year-on-year, with net profit to owners growing at the same 14% pace year-on-year to p2.3 billion. business in uk accelerated during the year as consumers sought out our brands in the off-trade and e-commerce channels while on-trade was effectively shut march-july and restrictions reimposed (so that not all premises were open) from november. single malts ‘jura’ and ‘tamnavulin’ captured the first and fifth positions of fastest-growing malt brands in uk while blended ‘whyte & mackay’ captured the fastest-growing blended whisky brand, as their sales soared to double-digit growths in uk. similarly, sales of ‘harveys’ had increased in uk. as markets opened up, exports to asia picked up from second quarter continuing through the rest of the year with large orders for ‘dalmore’ and ‘fettercairn’. while markets from europe, latin america, africa and middle east had been affected by the varying stages and degrees of lockdown, good growths were seen in north america and developing markets for ‘dalmore’, ‘jura’ and ‘tamnavulin’, and in europe for ‘dalmore’, ‘tamnavulin’ and ‘fettercairn’. global travel retail was the most challenged channel as most airports have remained closed and restricted. the segment’s gross profit margin was registered at 36% primarily due to shift in product mix. tight control on strategic marketing and other operating expenses (normally associated with on-trade and travel retail) boosted net profit and net profit rates.

total revenues grew 2% year-on-year to record-high p52.8 billion in 2020 as compared to p51.6 billion in 2019 as scotch whisky segment’s external revenues grew 14% and brandy’s dipped 2%. the group’s on-premise channel had been affected by the lockdowns and liquor bans while off- premise and e-commerce channels flourished. ‘emperador’, ‘terry’ and ‘el presidente’ remained to be the group’s top selling philippine, spanish and mexican brandy brands, respectively. single malts ‘the dalmore’, ‘jura’ and ‘tamnavulin’ were the group’s top selling scotch whisky brands.

other income went up 10% to p1.4 billion from p1.3 billion a year ago due to higher scrap sales, gain on sale of securities and unrealized foreign exchange gains recorded for this year.

total costs and expenses remained stable at p43.4 billion this year from p43.1 billion a year ago, up 0.7% year-on-year, as scotch whisky business’ costs and expenses, including intersegment purchases, expanded 12% (p1.4 billion) and those of brandy business contracted 4% (p1.3 billion).

costs increased 6%, which was faster than sales growth due to product mix and spike of cost inputs from abroad.

gross profit margins (gpm) on consolidated level remained healthy at 31% in 2020 and 34% in 2019. the slight swing was attributed to product mix, spike of cost inputs abroad and promotional bundling, especially towards the last quarter of the year in time for the christmas season. the gpms of the brandy and scotch whisky segments were respectively posted at 28% and 36% in 2020 as compared to 30% and 40% in 2019.

other operating expenses decelerated 18% (p1.6 billion) to p7.4 billion from p8.9 billion, mainly from reduced advertising and promotions as brand and marketing support were controlled; depreciation and amortization, due to right-of-use assets; professional fees, largely relating to loan refinancing and contracted services; and travel and transportation, due to lockdown and travel bans.

interest expense went down 30% (p0.2 billion) due to principal amortizations paid during the year. other charges went up slightly (p0.05 billion) to p0.08 billion due to foreign exchange losses realized during the year.

as a result of the foregoing, profit before tax improved 11% to p9.4 billion from p8.5 billion a year ago.

tax expense decreased 15% (p0.2 billion) to p1.4 billion from p1.6 billion a year ago due to lower taxable income and temporary differences for deferred tax.

as a result of the foregoing, net profit soared 18% (p1.2 billion) to p8.0 billion from p6.8 billion from a year ago. net profit to owners jumped 18% as well to p8.0 billion from p6.7 billion last year.

ebitda, which is computed as profit before interest expense, tax, depreciation and amortization amounted to p11.6 billion and p10.8 billion for 2020 and 2019, respectively, showing margins of 22% and 21% in respective years.

total assets amounted to p122.5 billion as at december 31, 2020, 3% lower than p126.0 billion as of december 31, 2019, which is primarily coming from trade and other receivables, prepayments and other current assets, and property, plant and equipment accounts. the group is strongly liquid with current assets exceeding current liabilities 2.4 times by the end of the current year.
cash and cash equivalents were depleted 2% or by p0.2 billion mainly from net cash used in financing and investing activities that exceeded net cash from operating activities, mainly attributed to payments for dividends, treasury shares and loans.
trade and other receivables decreased 7% of p1.7 billion due to collection from trade customers and deliveries from suppliers where advances were previously made.
financial assets at fair value through profit or loss of p52 million at the end of the current year pertained to instruments acquired during the current year.
prepayments and other current assets fell 27% or p0.5 billion due mostly to timing of prepayments such as lower general prepayments, deferred input vat and prepaid taxes at the end of 2020.
investments in a joint venture increased 9% or p0.3 billion from share in net income of blc and translation adjustment during the year.
property, plant and equipment contracted 9% or p2.6 billion primarily from additional depreciation and amortization and reclassification of assets as held for sale. there was little construction activity due to lockdown restrictions during the year. there was also a remeasurement of right-of-use assets (‘roua’) that reduced carrying amount of the roua and lease liabilities during the current year. [see notes 9 and 13]

deferred tax assets increased 136% or p0.08 billion, attributable to timing differences from local companies mainly on their lease liabilities in excess of their right-of-use assets.
non-current assets held for sale of p1.0 billion pertained to land and building intended for sale in the following year. these were reclassified from property, plant and equipment. [see notes 3.1(g) and 13]
retirement benefit assets reported at end-2019 (p0.2 billion) reversed to retirement benefit obligation at end-2020 (p0.4 billion) 264% or p0.6 billion, from actuarial liability booked in the current year by uk.
other non-current assets went up 27% or p0.3 billion from advances to suppliers, specifically the payment made on the purchase of a parcel of land (see note 23.10).
current interest-bearing loans went down 20% or p1.4 billion and the non-current portion by 1% or p0.2 billion, for combined decrease of p1.6 billion, from net repayment of bank loans and effect of translation adjustment of foreign loans.
trade and other payables dipped 10% or p1.8 billion, mainly from settlement of trade payables representing obligations to various suppliers of raw materials such as alcohol, molasses, flavorings and other supplies; offset by increase in accruals incurred by the group at years-end.
equity-linked debt securities went down to p3.4 billion from p5.3 billion a year ago (current and non- current) due to conversion of p1.8 billion into common shares in february 2020 by the holder. the p3.4 billion balance will mature in december 2021.
current and non-current lease liabilities were accounts brought about by the adoption of pfrs 16- leases beginning january 1, 2019. these amounted to p0.1 billion and p1.3 billion, respectively, at end of the current year, down 43% (p0.1 billion) and 25% (p0.4 billion) due to payments made during the year. [see notes 9.3 and 2.16(a) to the consolidated financial statements]
dividends payable pertained to unpaid dividends at beginning of the year, presented net of final withholding tax, which were payable and paid on january 20, 2020. there was no similar obligation at end-2020.
financial liabilities at fair value through profit or loss of p0.01 billion at beginning of the year matured at various points during the current year. there was no similar obligation at end-2020.
income tax payable dropped 12% or p0.2 billion primarily from lower unpaid income taxes by the group at current year-end.
provisions refer to the amounts provided by wmg for leased properties located in scotland. provisions went up 35% or p0.06 billion mainly due to increase in dilapidations provision and onerous lease provision arising from adjustment in assumptions attributable to covid-19. [see notes 17, 2.14 and 3.2(k) to the consolidated financial statements]
equity attributable to owners of the parent company increased by 4% or p2.8 bllion mainly from net profit (p8.0 billion) realized during the year as reduced by accumulated translation loss adjustments (p2.4 billion), dividends declared (p1.8 billion), revaluation reserves (p0.8 billion) and net treasury shares (p0.3 billion) during the year.
accumulated translation adjustments refer to the difference resulting in the translation of the foreign subsidiaries’ financial statements to philippine pesos. monetary assets and liabilities are translated at the closing rate and income and expenses at average exchange rates. the accumulated balance of the account is reflective of the depreciation in the value of philippine peso and/or foreign currencies.
treasury shares pertain to the acquisition cost of the shares that have been brought back from the market pursuant to the company’s ongoing buyback program. the account also included shares held by a subsidiary.

share options pertain to the options granted to qualified employees of the group pursuant to an approved employee share option plan. the increment of 24% or p27 million was a result of recognition of additional share options for the year with a corresponding debit to investments in edi account.
revaluation reserves plummeted by p0.8 billion due to actuarial gain on retirement benefit obligations booked by wmg.
other reserves include legal reserves that represent the statutory requirements in luxembourg which comprise of net wealth tax reserve and capital reserve at year-end.
non-controlling interest decreased 13% or p0.1 billion mainly from accumulated translation loss (p0.2 billion) that exceeded net profit share (p0.1 billion) realized by minority owners in dblc, a foreign subsidiary consolidated by end-2017 and in boozy, a local company consolidated starting in 2018.

the group sourced funds from operations and loans and borrowings. the company expects to meet its working capital requirements for the ensuing year primarily from available funds at year-end plus cash flows from operations. it may also from time to time seek other sources of funding, if necessary, which may include debt or equity financings, depending on its financing needs and market conditions.

the group’s renowned brandy and whisky products sold all over the world are the catalyst for continued growth and put the group in best position, with its high-quality aged inventory, for premiumization and innovation opportunities, as well as to adapt to trends and consumer appetite.

except for what have been noted:
there were no other known material events subsequent to the end of the year that would have a material impact in the current year being reported.
there are no other known trends or demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the group’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material way. the group does not have nor anticipate having any cash flow or liquidity problems. the group is not in default or breach of any note, lease or other indebtedness or financing arrangement requiring it to make payments.
there are no other known events that will trigger direct or contingent financial obligation that is currently considered material to the group, including any default or acceleration of an obligation. there are no other material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations, and other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons created during the reporting period.
there are no other known trends, events or uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably expected to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations. there are also no known events that will cause material change in the relationship between costs and revenues.
there are no other significant elements of income or loss that did not arise from continuing operations.
there were no other material issuances, repurchases or repayments of debt and equity securities.
the business has no seasonal aspects that had a material effect on the financial condition and results of operations of the group.
